please cite this article as: a. lalbakhsh, m. (behdad) jamshidi, h. siahkamari, a. ghaderi, a. golestanifar, r. linhart, j. talla, r. b.v.b. simorangkir, k. mandal, a compact lowpass filter for satellite communication systems based on transfer function analysis, international journal of electronics and communications (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aeue.2020.153318

this is a pdf file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. this version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. s1434 8411(20)30614 2 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aeue.2020.153318 aeue 153318

international journal of electronics and commuications ali lalbakhsh, mohammad (behdad) jamshidi, hesam siahkamari, amirhossein ghaderi,

alireza golestanifar, richard linhart, jakub talla, roy b. v. b. simorangkir, and kaushik

dr. ali lalbakhsh (phd in electronics engineering) is with the school of engineering, macquarie

university, nsw, australia, email: ali.lalbakhsh@mq.edu.au.com (corresponding author)

mr. mohammad (behdad) jamshidi is a phd student in the department of electromechanical

engineering and power electronics (kev), faculty of electrical engineering of the university of

mr. hesam siahkamari is a phd student in in the department of applied electronics and

telecommunications (kae), faculty of electrical engineering of the university of west bohemia,

mr. amirhossein ghaderi (master in electronics engineering) is a senior researcher at young

researchers and elite club, kermanshah branch, islamic azad university, kermanshah, iran,

alireza golestanifar (master in electronics engineering) is a senior researcher at young

dr. richard linhart (phd in electronics engineering) is an assistant professor in the department

of applied electronics and telecommunications (kae), faculty of electrical engineering of the

dr. jakub talla (phd in electrical engineering) is an assistant professor in the department of

electromechanical engineering and power electronics (kev), faculty of electrical engineering

dr. roy b. v. b. simorangkir (phd in electronics engineering) is a research associate at university

of rennes 1, cnrs, institut d'electronique et de tel´ ecommunications of rennes (ietr) umr

kaushik mandal is an assistant professor in the institute of radio physics and electronics, west bohemia, email: jamshidi@kev.zcu.cz

of electronics engineering, email: golestany950@yahoo.com

university of west bohemia, email: rlinhart@kae.zcu.cz

of the university of west bohemia, email: talic@rice.zcu.cz performance microstrip lowpass filter (lpf). unlike many other sophisticated

design methodologies of microstrip lpfs, which contain complicated

configurations or even over engineering in some cases, this paper presents a

straightforward design procedure to achieve some of the best performance of this

class of microstrip filters. the proposed filter is composed of three different

polygonal shaped resonators, two of which are responsible for stopband

improvement, and the third resonator is designed to enhance the selectivity of the

filter. a holistic performance assessment of the proposed filter is presented using

a figure of merit (fom) and compared with some of the best filters from the same

class, highlighting the superiority of the proposed design. a prototype of the

proposed filter was fabricated and tested, showing a 3 db cut off frequency (fc) at

1.27 ghz, having an ultrawide stopband with a suppression level of 25 db,

extending from 1.6 to 25 ghz. the return loss and the insertion loss of the

passband are better than 20 db and 0.25 db, respectively. the fabricated filter has

introduction: microstrip technology has been extensively used for implementation of

microwave passive and active components, due to its low cost fabrication process and its

versatile characteristics [1 6]. microstrip filters (lpfs) play a critical role in modern

communication systems for suppressing unwanted harmonics, as they are easily integrated with

other microwave components. therefore, passive lpfs with a small size, wide stopband, and

low cost are highly in demand . such high performance filters will play a significant role in

the upcoming new generation of the low cost satellite communications technology, where the

size and the cost of the earth receiver stations are critical. this is even more important for the requirements, there is a strong motivation to employ passive, affordable microwave and

electromagnetic components in the portable satellite receivers [8 11]. thus, various techniques

have been studied to achieve lpfs with the mentioned features [12 27]. a modified version of

t shaped resonators in conjunction with multiple open stubs was proposed in to realize a

compact lpf with a large stopband. in a different approach, a new e type feeding structure

was proposed to feed a cross shaped patch reonator to minimize the passband insertion loss

. coupled rhombic stubs were proposed in to improve both stopband and out of band

rejection. while the design procedures in , have been successful in some factors of

merit, their roll offs were reported to be around 50 db/ghz. to achieve high selectivity,

tapered sectorial resonators and large radial stubs were proposed in and , respectively.

despite the very sharp responses realized in these two works, both procedures resulted in a

relatively large circuit size. other methods, such as stepped impedance [13 17], pendulum

shaped resonator and spiral lines , have been proposed for wide stopband applications.

similar out of band performance along with a strong harmonic attenuation can be achieved

using defected ground structures [20, 21]; however, the implementation complexity is

in , a high impedance transmission line is loaded by multiple compact microstrip resonant

cells to provide both high selectivity and wide stopband, while the circuit size is not equally

weighted, resulting in a relatively large filter. in [23 27], numerical based approaches were

used to predict the transfer function of a lowpass filter and to extract its resonant frequencies.

with the development of nature based optimization algorithms, such as ant colony

optimization [28 29], neural networks [30 34] and particle swarm optimization [35 36], a new

avenue of research in the microwave and electromagnetic community has been established, considered as the associated challenge with this technique. simulators have been used to design and optimize a wide range of microwave and em

components, such as filters, power dividers, frequency selective surfaces [37 44]. apart from

the above mentioned applications, microstrip lpfs are integrated with other microwave

components, such as power dividers with harmonic suppression capability [45 46]. in , a

symmetric lpf composed of several square resonators was used to attenuate the reflected

signals throughout the passband up to 15 db, whereas the transition band is relatively large.

defected ground structure (dgs) has been reported as another technique for harmonic

suppression in lpfs, considerably extending the stopband range ,. however, the

attenuation level in the stopband of these filters are less than 18 db, and the return loss in the

passband is around only 10 db. also, radial shaped and semi circle patch resonators were

applied in , even though it suffers from a narrow stopband. reviewing related literature

reveals that most approaches mainly focus on improving one or some of the critical properties

of the lpfs, while other aspects, particularly design complications, are sacrificed or neglected.

hence, we propose a very simple, yet systematic design methodology, to reasonably satisfy all

factors of merit and achieve a significantly greater fom than many recently published lpfs.

wavelength at the cut off frequency. the measured transition band extends from 1.27 ghz to

1.67 ghz with attenuation levels of 3 and 40 db, respectively. the spurious signals are

significantly suppressed from 1.6 ghz up to 25 ghz, which is about 19fc. the proposed lpf

operating at 1.27 ghz with wide stopband and miniaturized dimensions is a good candidate

for the satellite communication technology. all simulations are carried out by ads momentum

on an rt 5880 substrate with a thickness of 0.381 mm. 2, where λg is the guided cells with different functionalities essential for the filter design. first, a wideband suppressing

cell with a high attenuation level is designed to ensure the wide stopband capability of the

filter. to do this, a pair of t shaped resonators is placed on a high impedance transmission

line, as shown in fig. 1(a). in this figure, vi and vo represent the input and output signals. the

proposed structure is modeled by a lc equivalent circuit to verify the suppression capability.

in addition to the lc model analysis, even and odd mode analysis can be used to justify the

filtering behavior of the microstrip filters as explained in , . in lc model proposed,

l1, l2 and c1 are inductances and capacitance of the transmission line, respectively. l3 and

c2 denote the inductance and capacitance of the high impedance lines of the t shaped

resonators, respectively. the inductance and capacitance of the low impedance stub are

introduced by l4 and c3, respectively. lumped element values are calculated and optimized

using the methods described in [7,16]. the lc values of the resonator are as follows: c1=0.24

is designed to create a deep transmission zero at 12 ghz with an ultrawide stopband.

l3 l1 vo fig. 1 the proposed wideband suppressing cell. (a)layout and lc equivalent circuit. (b) em

fig. 1 (b) shows the em and lc responses. to analyze and verify the operation of the lc

model, transfer function of the t shaped resonators is computed as (1). the formula of the first

transmission zero (tz1) is attained by equating the transfer function to zero as (2). notice, r is

the matching impedance of input and output ports (r = 50ω). as seen, the equation of tz1 is

relared to lc parameters, so that its location can be easily relocated by varying lc values. tz1

  ,  (1) location of tz1 is related to the lc values, particularly the values of l3, l4 and c3 which

represent the t shaped resonators equivalent model. fig 2 shows the effects of varying l4, l3

and c3. the sweep range of l3 and l4 is 0 to 1 nh and the sweep range of c3 is between 0 to

1 pf. as can be seen, by decresing the vlaues of l4 and l3, tz1 shifts to higher frequencies,

extending the stopband, while the cut off frequency is less affected by variation of l4

cpompared to l3. the next parameter which is effective to alter stopband range is c3.

according to fig 2, it is seen that decreasing the value of c3 increaes the stopband and cut off

frequency. it should be noticed that for swept values of l4, l3 and c3 only the one parameter 

20 fig. 2. variation of tz1 and its effects on the frequency reponse of the filter versus the

octagonal resonator: in the second step, another suppression cell is designed with the

advantage of providing a smaller transition band. this characteristic contributes to a higher

selectivity in the filtering mechanism of the proposed lpf. to do so, an octagonal resonator

along with its lc model with a transmission zero tuned at 5 ghz is designed and shown in fig. 12 )ghz 14 16 18 20

c4 l5 vo fig. 3 octagonal suppression cell. (a) layout and equivalent circuit. (b) em and lc

in the lc model, the inductor and the capacitor associated with the transmission line are

represented by l5 and c4, respectively. l6 and c5 are inductance and capacitance of the high

impedance line of octagonal resonator, respectively. in addition, the capacitor and the inductor

of the octagonal shaped stub are c6 and l7, respectively. the values of the lumped elements

l6=0.17 nh, l7=0.50 nh. the suppression performance of the proposed cell is verified by its

em and lc responses in fig. 3. the transfer function of the octagonal resonator and the tz2

5 , (3) in the third step, the desired cut off frequency of the filter is realized using a very sharp

response cell. so, two pentagonal resonators are proposed to introduce a significantly deep

transmission zero, placed very close to the desired cut off frequency, as shown in fig. 4. )

l8 vo fig. 4pentagonal resonators. (a) the layout and the equivalent circuit. (b) the em and lc

as can be seen from the lc and em responses, there is a strong transmission zero at 2 ghz,

due to the identical pentagonal resonators. in the lc model of pentagonal resonators, l8, l9

and c7 show inductances and capacitance of the transmission line, respectively. l10 and c8

are inductor and capacitor of the high impedance lines of the pentagonal resonators,

respectively. the inductor and capacitor of the pentagonal shaped stubs are depicted by l11

and c9, respectively. the values of the lumped elements are as follows: c7=0.24 pf, c8=0.77

obtained as (6) using transfer function of pentagonal resonators in (5). the physical dimensions

of the proposed lpf are classified in table 1. s11 layout s11 lc s21 layout s21 lc

the current disributions of the final structure at the cut off frequency (1.27 ghz) and a typical

frequency in the stopband (3.21 ghz) are ploted in figs. 6a and 6b. as observed, the current

density is stronger at 1.27 ghz and the flow is suppressed at the stopband. table 1: the physical dimensions of the proposed lpf 

3.7 fig. 5. current distributions of the proposed lpf. (a) cut off frequency (1.27 ghz), (b) stopband area (3.21 ghz)

measurement results: to verify the presented design approach, a prototype lpf was fabricated

and measured, as shown in fig. 6a. the fabricated model is implemented on an rt 5880

substrate with a thickness of 0.381 mm. the s parameters of the filter were measured using an

agilent vector network analyzer (e8361 c) and shown in fig. 6b. fig. 6c shows the variation

of group delay (gd) throughout the passband is only 0.7 ns, depicting a flat response.

according to these figures, the frequency response of the proposed filter has a 3 db cut off

frequency of 1.27 ghz with a very small transition band. the filter exhibits excellent in band

and out of band characteristics, providing a super ultrawide stopband, extending from 1.6 ghz

up to 25 ghz, which is about 19fc. the return loss and the insertion loss in the passband are

better than 20 db and 0.25 db, respectively, showing a flat and stable passband. the filter is

table 2 summarizes a comparison between some of the newly reported lpfs and the proposed

one, based on the specifications explained in and . fig. 6. the proposed lpf. (a) fabricated prototype, (b) simulated and measured results, sim. meas.

1 1.2 where αmax and αmin show the suppression level of 40 db and 3 db. also, the frequencies

corresponding with the suppression levels of 40 db and 3 db are fs and fc, respectively. the in table 2, the roll off rate (𝞷) is defined as:

relative stop band width (rsb) is given by :

the normalized circuit size (ncs) is: ncs af fom rl (db)

a systematic approach. in this approach, three polygonal resonators are designed, where two

resonators are collectively responsible for providing an ultrawide stopband, and the third

resonator independently controls the cut off frequency of the filter with a sharp roll off. the

filter suppresses all spurious bands up to the 19th harmonic, with a very good attenuation of 25

db, exhibiting an excellent out of band characteristic. the fabricated lpf has a high return

loss (20 db) and negligible insertion loss (0.25 db) in the passband. the filter is compact with

this research has been supported by the ministry of education, youth and sports of the czech

republic under the project op vvv electrical engineering technologies with high level of factor (af) is defined 1. finally, the fom is defined as: