a novel dual polarized continuous transverse stub antenna based on corrugated waveguides—part ii: experimental demonstration maciej ´smierzchalski, francesco foglia manzillo , member, ieee, michele del mastro , nicolas capet, baptiste palacin, ronan sauleau , fellow, ieee, and mauro ettorre , senior member, ieee

the dual mode, polarization agile parallel fed continuous transverse stub (cts) antenna architecture introduced in part i of this two part paper. the ka band dual mode cts array described in part i is characterized when it radiates in horizontal and vertical polarization. to this end, it is combined with two diferent quasi optical beamformers operating in a quasi transverse electromagnetic (quasi tem) and in a quasi transverse electric (quasi te1) mode, respectively. the scanning capabilities of both multibeam antenna systems are demonstrated. the cts array and its feed network comprising corrugated parallel plate waveguides (cppws) are fabricated by additive manufacturing. measurements show that the dual polarized cts antenna works between 29 and 32 ghz in a field of view of about 45◦, achieving a peak gain of 31.3 dbi and very low cross polarization. these promising results pave the way for the realization of dualircularly polarized beam scanning antennas with application to broadband and compact ka band ground terminals.

index terms— aperture antennas, dual polarization antennas,

i n part i of this two part paper, a novel dual polarized parallel fed continuous transverse stub (cts)

manuscript received october 24, 2019; revised october 4, 2020; accepted october 26, 2020. date of publication november 18, 2020; date of current version march 3, 2021. this work was supported in part by the centre national d'études spatiales (cnes), in part by the european union through the european regional development fund, and in part by the french region of brittany, ministry of higher education and research, rennes métropole and conseil départemental 35 through the cper project stic and ondes. (corresponding author: francesco foglia manzillo.)

maciej ´smierzchalski was with cnrs, umr 6164, institut d'électronique et des technologies du numérique (ietr), université de rennes 1, f 35000 rennes, france. he is now with atos, 95877 bezons, france, and also with the university of grenoble alpes, cea, leti, 38000 grenoble, france (e mail: maciej.smierzchalski@cea.fr).

institut d'électronique et des technologies du numérique (ietr), université de rennes 1, f 35000 rennes, france. he is now with the univerity of grenoble alpes, cea, leti, 38000 grenoble, france (e mail: francesco.fogliamanzillo@cea.fr). francesco foglia manzillo was with cnrs, umr 6164,

michele del mastro, ronan sauleau, and mauro ettorre are with cnrs, umr 6164, et des technologies du numérique (ietr), université de rennes 1, f 35000 rennes, france (e mail: michele.delmastro@univ rennes1.fr; ronan.sauleau@univ rennes1.fr; mauro.ettorre@univ rennes1.fr).

nicolas capet and baptiste palacin are with the antenna department, centre national d'études spatiales (cnes), 31401 toulouse, france (e mail: nicolas.capet@anywaves.fr; baptiste.palacin@cnes.fr).

color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at antenna architecture has been introduced. it comprises a single radiating aperture (an array of long slots) and a dual mode corporate feed network based on corrugated parallel plate waveguides (cppws). the operation of the cppws and the design tradeoffs have been analyzed. the design of an eightlement array operating in the ka band has been presented and numerically validated.

in this article (part ii), we report the experimental validation of the concept and prove a significant bandwidth enhancement over state of the art polarization agile cts antennas . the latter ones rely on cross connected single mode travelingave arrays, each fed by an independent beamformer, and are mainly suited for narrowband applications. their scaning performance is limited by the mutual coupling of the two orthogonal arrays, which increases with the scan angle. therefore, motorized phase shifting surfaces (psss) are often stacked on the aperture of cts arrays to achieve at the same time beam scanning and polarization control , . on the other hand, we show in this work that by exciting a single array with two orthogonal modes, dual polarization and scanning capabilities in one plane can be simultaneously achieved without any moving parts.

as opposed to , the architecture we present is suitable to be excited by a single dual polarized line source at the input of the dual mode cppw corporate feed network. possible designs synthesizing such a line source may rely on dualolarized slotted waveguide arrays , . as an alternative, the dual polarized array could be excited by a dual mode quasi optical system, e.g., a pillbox coupler designed for supporting the two antenna modes, illuminated by orthogoally polarized feeds. the specific design of the line source is beyond the scope of the present work, which focuses instead on the proof of concept, the fabrication technology, and the characterization of the scanning performance of the stand alone antenna in the ka band. therefore, the antenna is tested under quasi transverse electromagnetic (quasi tem) and quasi te1 mode excitation, respectively, using two sepaate pillbox beamformers , . this choice does not affect the conclusions of this article. the two antenna systems under test are shown in fig. 1. they radiate linearly polarized fields which, in what follows, will be referred to as horizontal (h) or vertical (v) when the cts array is fed by the quasi tem mode [see fig. 1(a)] or the quasi te1 mode [see fig. 1(b)], respectively. fig. 1. view of the two characterized systems. the dual polarized cts array is connected to (a) quasi tem and (b) quasi te1 pillbox beamformer.

though widely used in combination with cts antennas , these beamformers have been proposed almost exclusively for quasi tem ppw mode operation in the litrature , . a pillbox coupler based on rectangular waveguides and operating on the te10 mode was presented in . design solutions to launch and properly guide a quasie1 mode in a ppw beamformer are here discussed.

the two antenna systems of fig. 1 are designed to attain approximately the same beam pointing directions at 30 ghz so that the scanning performance for hnd volarization can be fairly compared. each beamformer comprises seven feeds corresponding to a specific scanned beam in the yz plane. the dual mode cts array is fabricated using stereolithography (sla), whereas computer numerical control (cnc) milling is employed for the beamformers. dedicated transitions interconect the cts array to both beamformers.

measurements prove that the dual polarized cts antenna works between 29 and 32 ghz achieving a cross polarization discrimination (xpd) higher than 24 db for both polarizations. although the dual mode cts array was optimized for broadide radiation , good scanning performance is demonstrated in a field of view of about 45◦ between 29 and 32 ghz.

this article is organized as follows. the design and perforance of the beamformers are described in section ii. the impact of beamformers and related transitions on the overall scanning performance is analyzed in section iii. the fabricaion of the prototypes and the accuracy of the sla process are discussed in section iv. an extensive characterization is presented in section v. conclusions are drawn in section vi.

both quasi tem and quasi te1 beamformers (see fig. 1) are based on a quasi optical architecture comprising a pillox coupler , , . they consist of two stacked hollow ppws, each of height h0, coupled by a 180◦ bend contouring a parabolic reflector. they are fed by sectoral fig. 2. schematic top view and main geometrical parameters of the quasiptical beamformers.

horns and provide at the output guided modes with planar wavefronts. the heights of the ppws in the quasi tem and quasi te1 beamformer are set to ht e m = 0.4λ0 = 4 mm and ht e = 0.7λ0 = 7 mm, respectively, where λ0 is the wavelength at 30 ghz. the quasi tem and quasi te1 modes have different propagation constants in the beamformers, which can be approximated by the values βt e m = k0 and βt e1 − (π/ ht e )2 . thus, the electrical lengths from the feeding horns to the reflectors of the beamformers are different. if the beamformers have the same geometry (i.e., the same focal lengths and diameters of the reflectors and feeds), the radiated beams corresponding to homologous horns would point to different angles . in this work, instead, both quasiptical systems were designed to form seven beams, targeting the following pointing directions in the yz plane at 30 ghz: 0◦, ±7.5◦, ±15◦, ±22.5◦. to this end, an in house tool based on geometrical optics (go) , was used. it computes, for each feed, the phase distribution along the y axis of the field reflected by the parabola at an interface between the upper ppw, i.e., a medium characterized by the wavenumber βt e m or βt e1 , depending on the propagating mode, and free space. in a first approximation, this is the phase distribution along each slot of the cts array, which allows one to determine the scan angles of the radiated beams. for both beamformers, the simplified geometry shown in fig. 2 was analyzed. the parabolic reflectors of the two beamformers have the same diameters, equal to the length of the radiating slots of the cts array. the values dt e m = dt e = 30 λ0 = 300 mm were chosen to attain a directivity higher than 33 dbi at 30 ghz for both excitation modes. seven input horns of aperture aph,t e m and aph,t e , for the quasi tem and the quasi te mode beamformer, respectively, are placed along the y axis in the focal planes of the reflectors, with a uniform spacing dh. a simple approach was followed to attain the targeted scan range and similar beam pointing directions for both antenna systems. the positions and apertures of the feeds were assumed the same for both beamformers. the spacing among the feeds was set equal to the feed aperture, i.e., aph,t e m = aph,t e = dh. then, the focal lengths ft e m and ft e and horn aperture were optimized using the go tool to meet two objectives, for both beamformers: first, attaining an edge taper lower than −10 db for the broadside beams, and second, enforcing that the outermost beams point at ±22.5◦ at 30 ghz. this choice ensures that the scan angles of the corresponding beams radiated by the two antennas are very (cid:2)

fig. 3. geometry of the input section of the quasi te1 beamformer, featuring a corrugated transition. (a) 3 d view. (b) section in xz plane. (c) top view.

close. the final values are listed in table i. after defining these parameters, the design of the beamformers is finalized with the aid of full wave simulations.

the quasi tem beamformer is based on a standard design discussed in previous works , , . therefore, only a few details are given in this article. the input feeds are h plane sectoral horns of height ht e m = 4 mm, excited by standard wr28 waveguides. the size of the transverse section of the input waveguide is 3.56 mm × 7.12 mm. the length of the flared section of the horn is l t e m horn

on the other hand, several modifications to standard pillbox designs have been introduced for realizing the quasi te1 beamformer. these changes are necessary to properly launch and guide the desired mode. with respect to the quasi tem beamformer, the input waveguides are rotated by 90◦ to launch y polarized electric fields. the 3 d view and cross sections of the horns in the quasi te1 mode pillbox are shown in fig. 3. = 25 mm. the length of the tapered section of the horn is l t e horn the aperture size is 7 mm × 20 mm.

corrugations run on top and bottom walls of the horns, parallel to the x y plane, as well as on the plates in the ppw transition region at the output of the horns. as shown in fig. 3, the corrugations have rectangular section of width wc = 0.5 mm and height hc = (ht e −ht e m )/2 = 1.5 mm. they are arrayed along the y axis with a constant spacing pc = 1.5 mm and extend for a distance ppwtrans = 10 mm beyond the apertures of the horns. fig. 4 compares the magnitudes of the electric field on the plane z = ht e /2 of the structure of fig. 3 with and without corrugations. the results are obtained from full wave simulations at 30 ghz, exciting horn 4 (see fig. 2) and terminating the ppw by a perfectly matched layer (pml). fig. 4. simulated electric field distribution inside horn 4 (plane z = ht e /2) of the quasi te1 beamformer. results obtained (a) without and (b) with corrugations.

fig. 5. simulated far field radiation patterns of the central horns (see horn 4 in fig. 2) inside the ppw regions of the two designed beamformers at 30 ghz. for the quasi te1 beamformer, the results relative to the proposed corrugated horn are compared to those obtained in the absence of corrugations.

they clearly demonstrate that the corrugations are necessary for the correct operation of the quasi te1 beamformer. if no corrugations are included, the electric field at the discontinuity between the horns tends to propagate along the y axis in the ppw, as shown in fig. 4(a). as a consequence, a significant amount of energy is lost as a lateral parallel plate mode. on the other hand, the corrugated horn and transition, acting as a hard surface , , hinder the propagation along the y axis, as shown by the field plot in fig. 4(b). due to the proposed design, the desired cylindrical wavefront is properly launched in the beamformer.

the far field patterns (x y plane cut) radiated at 30 ghz in the ppw region of the beamformers are plotted in fig. 5. the patterns of the quasi tem and quasi te1 feeds are similar and their half power beamwidth (hpbw) is about 35◦. for the quasi te1 mode, the pattern of the designed feed comprising corrugated sections (see fig. 3) is compared to that obtained simulating the same structure without corrugations (orange line in fig. 5). in the absence of corrugation, the pattern is clearly distorted and exhibits higher sidelobes and ripples.

c. pillbox coupling transition

the beamformers feature similar 180◦ bends to couple the energy from the bottom ppw to the upper one. in standard double layer pillbox systems, the two ppws are stacked one on top of the other so that they are separated by an electrically thin metal layer. the coupling transition is typically realized as a single slot , or multiple slots contouring the reflector. however, the realization of these transitions in a thin metal makes the structure fragile. an alternative design is here presented. it eases the fabrication of the beamformers using conventional cnc milling and enhances their mechanical fig. 6. cross section and main parameters of the pillbox transition between the bottom and top ppws of each beamformer.

fig. 7. simulated far field patterns (xy plane cut) of the open ended pillbox beamformers at 30 ghz compared to the results computed using the go model. (a) quasi tem and (b) quasi te1 beamformer.

robustness. the cross section (xz plane) of the proposed coupler type bend is shown in fig. 6. the region between the ppws is filled by a metal layer of thickness h s = 3 mm. a double mitered bend is optimized to minimize reflections. the maximum widths of the bends (wslot in fig. 6) are 6.5 and 10 mm for the quasi tem and quasi te1 beamformer, respectively.

d. performance of the quasi optical beamformers

the consistency of the simulated field distributions at the output of the beamformers with the results predicted by go analysis can be evaluated by comparing the corresponding fareld patterns radiated by each beamformer when the upper ppw is open ended, as in a pillbox antenna . in full wave simulations, each beamformer is laterally bounded by perfect electric conductors and radiation boundary is enforced on the open end. only one of the seven horns is fed at a time and all pointing directions in the xy plane of several beams radiated by fig. 8. the designed pillbox beamformers, assuming that they are open ended. the results are obtained from full wave simulations. the beams are denoted by the corresponding feed number (see fig. 2). quasi tem and quasi te1 beams are shown in dashed and solid lines, respectively.

others are terminated by matched loads. the radiation patterns (x y plane cuts) at 30 ghz are shown in fig. 7.

the two sets of beams have similar characteristics. the main lobes of the h polarized beams are slightly wider than those of corresponding v polarized beams. for instance, the hpbws of the broadside beams are 2.8◦ (quasi tem mode) and 2.6◦ (quasi te1 mode). this is mainly due to the distributions of the fields over the radiating elements. indeed, the ppws are realized, in practice, as largely overmoded rectangular waveguides. while the amplitude of the quasi te1 mode is uniform along the y axis, the amplitude of the quasi tem mode varies as a cosine and vanishes on the lateral walls parallel to the x axis.

the scan angles of the simulated pillbox systems are plotted against frequency in fig. 8. the pointing directions of the quasi tem beams are extremely stable in the frequency range of interest. the frequency variations observed for the other beamformer are due to the dispersion of the quasi te1 mode, which are nevertheless limited. the differences between the scan angles of homologous hnd v polarized beams are very small between 29 and 32 ghz.

iii. full antenna systems

a. beamformer to cts antenna interconnect

the pillbox systems and the cts antenna are fabricated as independent blocks. low loss transitions were designed at the output of each beamformer so that both can be connected to the same antenna prototype. similar designs, shown in fig. 9(a) and (b), respectively, were adopted. the heights of the output ppws of the quasi tem and quasi te1 beamformers are equal to the parameters ht e m and ht e of the input cppw of the corporate feed network . each transition includes a rightngle bend with a mitered corner that is tuned to gradually transform the input ppw modes into cppw modes. the simuated reflection coefficients of the transitions, each fed by a sinle mode, are both less than −20 db between 27 and 35 ghz.

b. simulated performance and impact of the beamformers

in this section, the simulated scanning performance of the two complete antenna systems is compared with the results sections (xz plane) of the output transitions of (a) quasi tem and fig. 9. (b) quasi te1 beamformers enabling the interconnection to the cts antenna.

fig. 10. simulated radiation patterns (yz cut) at 30 ghz of the full antenna system (dashed lines) and the stand alone cts array (solid lines). in the latter case, the array is excited using the simulated field distribution at the output of the pillbox. (a) horizontal polarization (quasi tem system). (b) vertical polarization (quasi te1 system).

obtained for the stand alone dual mode cts array described in . this comparison allows one to assess the impact of beamformers and related transitions (see section iii a) on the radiation patterns and gain. the results for the stand alone antenna are found by exciting the input of the cppw feed network (see port t1_p1 in [1, fig. 13]) with the simulated field distributions at the output of the corresponding pillbox coupler, i.e., the aperture field considered in section ii d. on the other hand, the data relative to the full antenna systems are obtained from full wave simulations.

fig. 10 shows the radiation patterns at 30 ghz in the scaning plane (yz plane), for hnd v polarizations. by virtue of symmetry, only the beams pointing at nonnegative angles are reported. each pattern is normalized to the maximum of the corresponding broadside beam. the patterns relative to complete antenna systems (in dashed lines) exhibit slightly wider beamwidths with respect to those radiated by the standlone antenna (in solid lines). this difference and other minor discrepancies on the first slls are mainly due to phase aberrations introduced by the transition from the beamformer to the cts antenna.

the gain is plotted in fig. 11 as a function of frequency. with reference to the broadside beams, the losses at 30 ghz due to the beamformer and the output transition are about 0.5 and 0.8 db under quasi tem and quasi te1 mode excitation, respectively. the beamformer supporting the quasi te1 mode introduces higher losses for all beams in most of the frequency range considered. this can also be observed by comparing fig. 11(a) and (b) the differences between the values of the gain for the full system and the stand alone cts antenna. nevertheless, for all beams, under both excitation modes, the insertion loss does not exceed 1.8 db between 27.5 and 32 ghz.

the frequency dispersion of the quasi te1 mode affects the scan loss of the vertically polarized antenna and the variations of the realized gain in the band, which are greater than the values observed under quasi tem operation. the performance degradation is more evident for the scanned beams. the phase (a) picture of the waveguide sample realized by stereolithography fig. 12. and (b) measured transmission coefficient, in blue line, compared to that of a standard wr28 metallic waveguide (orange line).

fig. 13. exploded view of the cts antenna fed by the quasi te1 mode pillbox. the various blocks of the system are highlighted with different colors.

aberrations due to the off focus illumination of the parabolic reflectors of the beamformers are more relevant when the incident mode is quasi te1. as a result, the gain drops faster with the scan angle compared with the case of quasi tem excitation. the cutoff frequency increases with the scan angle [see beam 1 in fig. 11(b)]. nevertheless, the results show that the bandwidth is compatible with the requirements of kaand satcom applications; in both polarization modes, the realized gain of each beam varies less than 2 db between 28.5 and 32 ghz.

milling and electroerosion techniques are commonly employed, up to e band, to manufacture cts antennas based on hollow waveguides , , , . however, these processes are not suitable for structures comprising corruations on both vertical and horizontal planes, such as the cppw feed network. additive manufacturing techniques are instead suited for this task. their resolution and tolerances are fine enough for realizing microwave systems at ka band. therefore, the cts array was realized using stereolithography (sla). on the other hand, both quasi optical beamformers, which comprise at most 1 d corrugations, were fabricated using cnc machining.

the sla process shapes a photopolymer resin defining layer by layer its transverse section. the resulting surface roughness affects the microwave performance. in order to evaluate the losses introduced by this process, a standard wr28 waveguide of length 72 mm was fabricated and charcterized in the ka band. the fabrication is divided into three fig. 14. (a) picture of the cts antenna fed by the quasi tem mode beamormer. details of the cppw feed network fabricated by stereolithography (b) before and (c) after copper plating.

main steps: shaping the resin cores, electroless copper plating (10 μm thick), and successive electroless silver plating (5 μmhick). the sample shown in fig. 12(a) was manufactured in two sections to achieve uniform metal plating. these two parts were joined along the waveguide centerline in the e plane to minimize the impact of possible air gaps. the waveguide was measured using a network analyzer calibrated with a wr28 hp kit. fig. 12(b) compares the measured transmission coeffiient of the waveguide to that of the thru of the calibration kit. the sla fabricated sample exhibits an attenuation of about 3.7 × 10−3 db/mm at 30 ghz. due to the silver plating, it achieves an insertion loss even lower than the standard thru. these results prove that the selected sla process introduces marginal losses.

b. prototype assembly

the dual polarized cts antenna and the quasi optical beamformers were fabricated in several blocks and assembled using screws and dowels. the sla manufactured radiating section was divided into eleven parts, highlighted in fig. 13. a picture of the entire antenna system is shown in fig. 14(a) when the quasi tem beamformer is connected to the cts array. the inputs of the seven feeds of the beamformer are visible in the foreground.

fig. 14(b) and (c) shows one block of the cppw feed network before and after copper plating, respectively. the longitudinal corrugations can be appreciated. the measured tolerances on the parameters of cppws are about ±10 μm. the cppw network is filled by foam spacers [in white in fig. 14(a)], whose dimensions are guaranteed with a tolerance of 50 μm, i.e., λ/20 at 30 ghz. these spacers improve the mechanical stability of the antenna under test. indeed, the thin and long plastic cores used for the outer plates of the cppws fig. 15. measured reflection coefficients at the input horns when the cts antenna is fed by (a) quasi tem or (b) quasi te1 beamformer.

fig. 16. measured and simulated cond cross polarized patterns at 30 ghz (yz plane cut) for the broadside beam. the dual polarized cts antenna is excited by (a) quasi tem mode and (b) quasi te1 beamformer.

tend to bend toward the center and to move off their nominal positions. these flaws slightly modify the sections of the cppws and lead to a nonuniform power division in the feed network. the use of a more rigid plastic or novel selective laser melting (slm) processes can mitigate these issues, providing more robust components. at the time of the fabrication of the prototype, the roughness guaranteed by the slm technology was considered unsuited for antenna applications at ka band.

the reflection coefficients, shown in fig. 15, were measured by connecting a vector network analyzer to each input horn through a coaxial to waveguide transition. the worst results fig. 17. measured and simulated radiation patterns (yz plane) of the dualolarized cts antenna at 30 ghz when fed by (a) quasi tem mode and (b) quasi te1 beamformer. each beam is normalized to its maximum.

are obtained when the central feeds (horn 4 in fig. 2) are excited since they are located in the focus of the parabolic reflectors. the −10 db impedance matching band when the antenna is excited by the in focus horn of the quasi tem beamformer ranges from 27 to 32 ghz. the reflection coeffiient of the homologous feed of the quasi te1 antenna system [see fig. 16(b)] is less than −10 db starting from 28.5 ghz, except for some ripples around 31 ghz. this measurement also shows that the cutoff of the quasi te1 mode is at about 26.5 ghz, which is slightly higher than the value computed in the design (about 24.5 ghz for the reference cppw ). this discrepancy can be attributed to the bending of the thin plastic cores of the cppw structures, discussed in section iv b, and to alignment errors in the assembly of the beamformer and the cts array. as a result, the operating band of the quasi te1 antenna system is shifted at higher frequencies.

the radiation performance was characterized in the compact antenna test range (catr) of ietr. the co polar and crossolar patterns (yz plane cut) of the broadside beam at 30 ghz are shown in fig. 16. the measured results are in good agreement with simulations. small differences in terms of beamwidth of the main lobe and positions of the dips are observed when the antenna is fed by the quasi te1 mode. they are partially caused by the shift of the operating band. the measured values of the hpbw are about 2.4◦ and 2.8◦ fig. 18. measured gain pattern (cut in yz plane) as a function of frequency and elevation angle, for the beams pointing at nonnegative angles (corresponding to the excitation of horns 1 4 in fig. 2). results obtained when the cts antenna is fed by (a) (d) quasi tem and (e) (h) quasi te1 beamformer.

for hnd v polarizations, respectively, while the peak crossolarization levels are less than −37 and −28 db. the higher cross polarized component when the antenna is fed by the quasi te1 mode is due to the beamformer, which may guide residual quasi tm1 fields, and to the transition to the cppw feed network.

fig. 17 compares the measured and simulated patterns of the scanned beams at 30 ghz. for both polarizations, each beam is normalized to its maximum value. the deviations of measured scan angles from the corresponding simulated values are less than 1◦. they are more relevant for v polarized beams, as a consequence of the observed shift of the cutoff frequency of the quasi te1 mode. the first slls increase with the scan angle, due to the off focus illumination of the beamformers, and reach −11 and −8 db for the hnd volarized outermost beams, respectively. the anisotropy of the cppw is more relevant under quasi te1 mode excitation. as a result, the increase of the slls with the scan angle is faster for v polarized beams.

fig. 18 shows the measured realized gain as a function of frequency and elevation angle in the yz plane, for both polarizations and beams pointing at nonnegative scan angles. the characteristics of the broadside beam are stable over most of the frequency range (27 32 ghz) when the antenna is fed by the quasi tem beamformer [see fig. 18(a)]. the slls are, in average, well below −20 db. the gain dip around 30.6 ghz corresponds to a destructive interference due to phase and amplitude imbalance on the radiating slots, which can be attributed to the aforementioned bending of plastic cores and misalignment between the beamformer and the radiating section. this explanation is confirmed by the presence at this frequency of asymmetries and high slls in the xz plane cut of the radiation pattern, not shown here for brevity, which is, instead, elsewhere close to the expected si nc pattern of a uniform array. table ii measured xpd of the dual pol cts antenna between 29 and 32 ghz

the broadside v polarized beam is shown in fig. 18(e). the gain drops and the slls rise in the low edge of the band, as one moves toward the cutoff of the quasi te1 mode. a similar performance degradation is observed at high frequencies, due to the increased input reflection coefficient beyond 31 ghz and to the progressive onset of higher order modes.

the measured peak realized gain of the broadside beams is

31.3 and 30.6 dbi for hnd v polarizations, respectively.

fig. 18(a) (d) shows that the quasi tem antenna system attains low scan losses for all beams, as well as stable performance over the band. the v polarized antenna exhibits a more pronounced beam squint due to the frequency dispersion of the quasi te1 mode. the scan angle varies from 21.1◦ to 23.6◦ between 29 and 32 ghz. the scan loss for the v polarized outermost beam is 2.8 db at 30.5 ghz. by comaring fig. 18(e) (h), one can also observe that the cutoff frequency of the quasi te1 mode increases when the antenna beam is scanned. these observations are further corroborated fig. 19. measured peak directivity as a function of frequency when the cts array is excited by the quasi tem (solid lines) and quasi te1 (dashed lines) beamformer. the results are plotted for the broadside and outermost beams.

in fig. 19, comparing the measured directivity of the broadide and outermost beams, for both polarizations, against frequency. when the antenna operates on a quasi te1 mode, its bandwidth and scan loss degrade with the beam pointing direction at a faster rate. this performance can be improved by engineering the dispersion of the beamformer and the cppw feed network under oblique incidence. nevertheless, although the dual mode cppw network has been optimized for broadide radiation, a good performance in a scan range exceeding 45◦ has been experimentally demonstrated between 29 and 32 ghz for both polarizations.

the values of the radiation efficiency at 30 ghz of the full antenna systems, computed as the ratio between measured realized gain and measured directivity, are 80% and 90% for hnd v polarized broadside beams, respectively. at the same frequency, the values for the outermost beams are 84% (quasi tem mode) and 79% (quasi te1 mode). these experimental results prove that the proposed dual polarization shared aperture design and fabrication technology preserve the characteristic of high efficiency of standard cts arrays.

the measured values of the xpd in this band are reported in table ii for nonnegative scan angles. the xpd is higher than 11 db even for the outermost v polarized beams. these results confirm that the proposed dual mode antenna system achieves high polarization purity.

the key figures of merit and features of the antenna presented in this work are compared in table iii to the best polarization agile cts arrays reported in the literature. both the antennas in and rely on two orthogonal, crossonnected series fed arrays of long slots, each illuminated by a dedicated quasi optical beamformer supporting the fun damental tem mode. due to the parallel fed architecture, the dual mode antenna presented in this article attains, for broadside radiation, a relative −3 db gain bandwidth, which is almost eight times the bandwidth reported in . the modal dispersion intrinsically limits the scan range achievable by the proposed antenna when excited by standard pillbox systems. however, it is important to stress that no beam scanning is demonstrated in , while the antenna in covers a ±40◦ field of view in elevation, for all azimuth planes, only resorting to a mechanically rotated riley prism loading the cts array. this device further narrows the bandwidth (<1%) for offoresight radiation. the antenna we propose achieves, instead, a ±24◦ scan range leveraging on an architecture suitable for electronic beam switching. the research on dispersionngineered dual mode beamformers could lead to a significant enhancement of the field of view attained in the present work.

this two part paper introduced, described, and experimenally validated a novel dual polarized cts antenna architecure. polarization agility is achieved due to the dual mode operation of the cts array and related feed network, which is based on expressly designed corrugated waveguides. key advantages over existing dual polarized cts antennas include broadband operation and the use of a single radiating aperure and feeding system instead of two orthogonal arrays individually excited by a dedicated beamformer. moreover, the proposed architecture allows for beam scanning in one plane without any add on motorized pss. as a first proof of concept, the dual polarization and scanning capabilities of a ka band eight element array were characterized using two separate pillbox beamformers, supporting a quasi tem and a quasi te1 mode, respectively. the cppw based cts array was fabricated using a low cost sla process.

the measured broadside beams exhibit stable characteristics and comparable realized gain values between 29 and 32 ghz. such a wide relative bandwidth (≈11.6%) largely exceeds those attained by state of the art dual polarized cts arrays that are penalized by the traveling wave radiation mechanism. in this band, the peak realized gain is 31.3 and 30.6 dbi, while the cross polar components are less than −37 db and −28 db, under quasi tem and quasi te1 excitation, respectively. though designed for broadside radiation, the dual polarized array achieves a good performance in a range of ±22.5◦ in the scanning plane, between 29 and 32 ghz, achieving an xpd higher than 11 db in any case. the performance is partially limited by fabrication and assembly inaccuracies, such as the bending of cppws and misalignment errors. alternative 3 d printing techniques, such as slm, not available at the time of fabrication, could further enhance the reliability of the process and the antenna performance.

the experimental results reveal the potential of the concept for future compact satcom antennas combining broadband coverage with switchable circular polarization.

the authors would like to thank xavier morvan, institut d'électronique et des technologies du numérique (ietr), for his help in manufacturing and assembling the prototype and dr. laurent le coq, ietr, for the antenna characterization.

t. lou, x. x. yang, l. li, and e. abubaker, "a flat dual polarized continuous transverse stub antenna array based on substrate integrated waveguide," in proc. 12th eur. conf. antennas propag. (eucap), apr. 2018, pp. 1 3.

w. w. milroy, "inscribed polarizer array for polarization diverse appli

t. teshirogi, y. kawahara, a. yamamoto, y. sekine, n. baba, and m. kobayashi, for millimeter wave applications," in proc. ieee antennas propag. soc. int. symp. digest. held conjunct: usnc/ursi nat. radio sci. meeting, vol. 1, jul. 2001, pp. 346 349.

e. girard, g. valerio, m. ettorre, r. sauleau, and h. legay, "physicalptics analysis and design of a beam forming network coupled to an imaging system configuration for ka band satellite applications," in proc. 9th eur. conf. antennas propag. (eucap), apr. 2015, pp. 1 5. and m. j. lancaster, "millimeter wave high gain frequency scanned antenna based on waveguide continuous transverse stubs," ieee trans. antennas propag., vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 6370 6375, nov. 2018. lu, q. you, y. wang, j. huang,

maciej ´smierzchalski was born in gda´nsk, poland, in 1983. he received the m.sc. degree from the gdansk university of technology, gda´nsk, in 2008, and the ph.d. degree in signal processng and telecommunications from the university of rennes 1, rennes, france, in 2014.

in 2006, he was a visiting student with the ecole centrale de lille, lille, france. he was with nxp semiconductors, caen, france, in 2007, and radioom, gda´nsk, in 2009. in 2012, he was a visiting ph.d. student with the university of siena, siena, italy. from 2014 to 2016, he was a post doctoral fellow with the institut d'electronique et de telécommunications de rennes (ietr), university of rennes 1. since 2016, he has been with the french alternative energies and atomic energy commission (cea), grenoble, france, and atos, grenoble, france. his current research interests include the analysis and design of leaky wave antennas, periodic structures, wideband arrays, near field focusing techniques, and bioelectromagnetism.

dr. ´smierzchalski was a recipient of the best innovation award at the 39th european space agency antenna workshop 2018 in noordwijk, the netherlands.

francesco foglia manzillo ieee) received the b.sc. and m.sc. degrees (cum laude) in electronics engineering from the university of naples federico ii, naples, italy, in 2010 and 2012, respectively, and the ph.d. degree in signal processng and telecommunications from the university of rennes 1, rennes, france, in 2017. (member,

in 2012, he was an intern with the electronic research laboratory, delft university of technolgy, delft, the netherlands, and nxp semiconducors, eindhoven, the netherlands. in 2016, he spent six months as a visiting ph.d. student at the radiation laboratory, university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, usa. since july 2017, he has been with the french alternative energies and atomic energy commission, laboratory of electronics and information technologies (cea leti), grenoble, france. his research interests include the analysis, synthesis, and design of antenna arrays, quasi periodic structures (transmitarrays, frequency selective surfaces, and polarization converters), numerical modeling, and the integration of millimeter wave antenna systems.

dr. foglia manzillo was a co recipient of the best innovation award at the

39th european space agency antenna workshop in 2018.