a technical comparison of three low earth orbit satellite constellation systems to provide global broadband

department of aeronautics and astronautics, massachusetts institute of technology, 77 massachusetts avenue, cambridge, 02139, usa

corresponding author. e mail addresses: portillo@mit.edu (i. del portillo), bcameron@mit.edu (b.g. cameron), crawley@mit.edu (e.f. crawley). ∗ , bruce g. cameron, edward f. crawley

the idea of providing internet from space using large constellations of leo satellites has re gained popularity in the last years. despite the setbacks suffered by the projects proposed in the decade of the '90s , a new wave of proposals for large low earth orbit (leo) constellations of satellites to provide global broadband emerged between 2014 and 2016. a total of 11 companies have applied to the federal commuications commission (fcc) to deploy large constellations in noneostationary satellite orbits (ngso) as a means to provide broadband services. these new designs range from 2 satellites, as proposed by space norway, to 4,425 satellites, as proposed by spacex. due to the large number of satellites in these constellations, the name "megaonstellations" was coined to refer to these new proposals.

the main differences of these new mega constellations compared to t

their predecessors from the 90's (e.g., iridium, globalstar, orbcomm), are the increased performance that results from the use of digital communication payloads, advanced modulation schemes, multi beam antennas, and more sophisticated frequency reuse schemes, as well as cost reductions from advanced manufacturing processes and reduced launch costs. in addition to reduced costs and increased technical capabilities, the increasing demand for broadband data, as well as the projections of growth of the mobility (aerial, maritime) markets, proided major incentives for the development of these systems.

of the 11 proposals registered within the fcc, there are three that are in an advanced stage of development, with launches planned in the next 3 years: oneweb's, spacex's, and telesat's.

this paper reviews the system architecture of each of these megaonstellations, as described in their respective fcc filings (as of september 2018), and highlights the similarities and differences amongst the three systems. we then proceed to estimate the total system throughput using a novel statistical framework that considers both the orbital dynamics of the space segment, the variability in perormance induced by atmospheric conditions for the user and feeder links, and reasonable limits on the sellable capacity.

using large constellations of leo satellites to provide global conectivity was first proposed in the 90's, fueled by the increasing demand for cellular and personal communications services, as well as general internet usage. among the leo systems proposed, some were cancelled even before launch (e.g., teledesic, celestri, skybridge), whereas others filed for bankruptcy protection shortly after the beginning of operations (e.g., iridium, globalstar, orbcomm) .

multiple technical reports were published (mostly by the contellation designers themselves) outlining the architecture of each of the proposed systems: sturza described the technical aspects of the original teledesic satellite system, a 924 satellite constellation; paterson analyzed the 288 satellites system that resulted from downsizing the original proposal; the iridium system was comprehenively described by leopold in several papers [5,6]; and globalstar's constellation was analyzed by wiedeman .

from the comparative approach, comparetto reviewed the globalstar, iridium, and odyssey systems, focusing on the system arhitecture, handset design and cost structures of each of the proposals. dumont studied the changes these three systems went through from 1991 to 1994. evans analyzed different satellite systems for peronal communications in different orbits (geo, meo, and leo), and later compared the different proposals for ka band and ku band systems in leo. the approaches followed in these references were mostly descriptive in nature, providing overviews on the architectures of the various leo systems. on the other hand, shaw compared quantitatively the capabilities of the cyberstar, spaceway, and celestri proposals assessing variables such as capacity, signal integrity, availbility, and cost per billable t1/minute.

the research related to the new leo proposals is scarce and has focused on analyzing debris and impact probabilities [14,15], as well as comparing the qualities of leo and geo systems in serving maritime and aeronautical users . in particular, le may studied the probability of collision for spacex and oneweb satellites operating in the current leo debris environment, while foreman provided several policy recommendations to address orbital debris concerns after analyzing the number of encounters between satellites and space debris. finally, mclain compared the two aforementioned systems against multiple geostationary, very high throughput satellites, and concluded that the latter offer a simpler, less risky, and more ecoomical path to providing large for the aeronautical and maritime inustries.

this paper adopts a similar approach as evans to compare the proposals of oneweb, telesat, and spacex. we first describe each of the systems, and then, we conduct a comparative analysis for some addiional aspects of the constellations. the second half of this paper is devoted to estimating the performance (in terms of total system itu leo lhcp los modcod modulation and coding scheme ngso non geostationary satellite orbits nsga ii non dominated sorted genetic algorithm ii oisl rhcp tt&c international telecommunications union low earth orbit left handed circular polarization line of sight

optical inter satellite links right handed circular polarization telemetry, tracking and command

throughput and requirements for the ground segment) of the three systems.

the objectives of this paper are twofold. first, to present the system architecture on a consistent and comparable basis of oneweb's, telesat's, and spacex's constellations, while conducting a technical comparison between them; second, to estimate the total system throughput and requirements for the ground segment for each of the proposals using a statistical method that considers both the orbital dynamics of the space segment and the variability in performance inuced by atmospheric conditions both for the user and feeder links.

this paper is structured as follows: section 2 discusses the different system architectures for the three systems conceived by telesat, oneweb and spacex; section 3 introduces the methodology to estimate the total system capacity and derive the requirements for the ground segment.; section 4 presents the results in terms of total system throughput and number of gateway and ground station locations reuired by each of the mega constellations; section 5 identifies the major technical challenges that we believe these systems still have to overome before becoming operational; and section 6 presents our overall conclusions.

this section compares telesat's, oneweb's, and spacex's systems, as described in their fcc fillings and press releases as of september 2018.

2.1. telesat's system

telesat's ka band constellation comprises at least 117 satellites distributed in two sets of orbits: the first set (polar orbits) of 6 circular orbital planes will be at 1000 km, 99.5° inclination, with at least 12 satellites per plane; the second set (inclined orbits) will have at least 5 circular orbital planes, at 1200 km, inclined at 37.4°, with a minimum of 10 satellites per plane. while the polar orbits provides general global coverage, the second set focuses on the regions of the globe where most of the population is concentrated. fig. 1 depicts telesat's constellation. the fields of regard (for) of the satellites in the polar and inclined orbits are depicted in red and blue respectively. the minimum elevaion angle for a user is 20 degrees.

adjacent satellites, whether within the same plane, within adjacent planes in the same set of orbits, and within the two orbital sets, will communicate by means of optical inter satellite links. because of the use of crosslinks, a user will be able to connect to the system from anywhere in the world, even when the user and a gateway are not within the line of sight of a satellite simultaneously. fig. 1. constellation pattern for telesat's system. blue corresponds to inclined orbits, red to polar orbits. (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

board an advanced digital communications payload with a direct raiating array (dra). the payload will include an on board processing module with demodulation, routing, and re modulation capabilities, thus decoupling up and downlink, which represents an important inovation upon current bent pipe architectures. the dra will be able to form at least 16 beams on the uplink direction and at least another 16 beams in the downlink direction, and will have beam forming and beam shaping capabilities, with power, bandwidth, size, and boresight dynamically assigned for each beam to maximize performance and minimize interference to gso and ngso satellites. moreover, each satellite will have 2 steerable gateway antennas, and a wide field ofiew receiver beam to be used for signaling.

the system is designed with several gateways distributed georaphically across the world, each hosting multiple 3.5 m antennas. the control center in ottawa will monitor, coordinate, and control the reource allocation processes, as well as the planning, scheduling and maintenance of the radio channels.

telesat's constellation will use a bandwidth of 1.8 ghz in the lower spectrum of the ka band (17.8 20.2 ghz) for the downlinks, and a bandwidth of 2.1 ghz in the upper ka band (27.5 30.0 ghz) for the uplinks.

oneweb's ku + ka band constellation comprises 720 satellites in 18 circular orbital planes at an altitude of 1200 km, each plane inlined at 87°. fig. 2, shows the constellation pattern of oneweb's system.

each satellite will have a bent pipe payload with 16 identical, nonteerable, highly elliptical user beams. the footprint of these beams guarantees that any user will be within the line of sight of at least one satellite with an elevation angle greater than 55°. moreover, each saellite will have two gimballed steerable gateway antennas, one of which will be active, while the other will act as a back up and handover antenna. each user beam will have a single channel in ku band, which will be mapped to a channel in ka band. the channels in the return direction will have a bandwidth of 125 mhz, whereas those in the forward direction will have a bandwidth of 250 mhz.

oneweb's system employs the ku band for the user communicaions, and the ka band for gateway communications. in particular, the 10.7 12.7 and 12.75 14.5 ghz band will be used for the downlink and uplink user communications respectively, while the 17.8 20.2 ghz and the 27.5 30.0 ghz bands will be used for the downlink and uplink gateway communications respectively. fig. 2. constellation pattern for oneweb's system.

the ground segment is envisioned to constitute 50 or more gateway earth stations, with up to ten 2.4 m gateway antennas each. on the user side, oneweb's system was designed to operate with 30 75 cm paraolic dishes, phased arrays antennas, and other electronically steering antennas. because the satellites do not use inter satellite links, services can only be offered in regions where the users and a ground station are simultaneously within the line of sight (los) of the satellite.

2.3. spacex's system

spacex's ku + ka band constellation comprises 4425 satellites that will be distributed across several sets of orbits. the core contellation, which will be deployed first, is composed of 1600 satellites evenly distributed in 32 orbital planes at 1150 km, at an inclination of 53° (blue). the other 2825 satellites will follow in a secondary deloyment, and will be distributed as follows: a set of 32 planes with 50 satellites at 1110 km and an inclination of 53.8° (orange), a set of 8 orbital planes with 50 satellites each at 1130 km and an inclination of 74° (magenta), a set of 5 planes with 75 satellites each at 1275 km and an inclination of 81° (black), and a set of 6 orbital planes with 75 saellites each at 1325 km and an inclination of 70° (yellow). fig. 3 deicts the constellation pattern for spacex's mega constellation.

each satellite will carry on board an advanced digital payload containing a phased array, which will allow each of the beams to be individually steered and shaped. the minimum elevation angle for a user terminal is 40°, while the total throughput per satellite is enviioned to be 17 23 gbps, depending on the characteristics of the user terminals. furthermore, the satellites will also have optical inter saellite links to ensure continuous communications, offer service over the sea, and mitigate the effects of interference.

the ground segment will be composed of 3 different types of eleents: tracking, telemetry and commands (tt&c) stations, gateways antennas, and user terminals. on one hand, the tt&c stations will be scarce in number and distributed across the world, and their antennas will be 5 m in diameter. on the other hand, both the gateways and user terminals will be based on phase array technology. spacex plans to have a very large number of gateway antennas, distributed across the world close to or co located with internet peering points.

spacex's system will use the ku band for the user communications, and gateway communications will be carried out in ka band. in partiular, the 10.7 12.7 ghz and the 14.0 14.5 ghz bands will be used for the downlink and uplink user communications respectively, while the 17.8 19.3 ghz and the 27.5 30.0 ghz bands will be used for the downlink and uplink gateway communications respectively. fig. 3. constellation pattern for spacex's system. different orbit sets are reresented with different colors. (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

this section compares the three proposed satellite systems further expanding the previous descriptions, and analyzing aspects that have not been addressed in the previous system descriptions.

2.4.1. orbital positions and number of satellites in line of sight

as shown in table 1, all three systems have in common the use of circular orbits with similar radii, all of them in the 1000 1350 km range. however, while oneweb uses a traditional polar orbits configration to provide global coverage, both spacex and telesat use a multiple orbit set configuration with some satellites placed in inclined orbits to provide coverage over the more densely populated areas of the planet, and others located in polar orbits to provide global coverage.

these differences in orbital positions, together with the fact that the total number of satellites in the constellation varies greatly among competing systems, result in big differences in the average number of satellites within los for a given location. to partially compensate for this, telesat the system with the fewest number of satellites will operate at lower elevation angles (20°) compared to spacex's and oneweb's systems (40° and 55° respectively). this lower elevation angle might result in more frequent link blockages (due to foliage, buildings obstruction) and link outages (due to higher atmospheric attenuation). fig. 4 shows the average number of satellites within los (considering the minimum elevation angles reported in the fcc filings) for different latitude values.

even though the number of satellites in telesat's constellation is significantly smaller than in oneweb's, the number of satellites within los is higher in the ± 60° latitude band, where most of the population concentrates. this happens because the minimum elevation angle of is considerably smaller than for oneweb (20° vs. 55°). telesat fig. 4. number of satellites in line of sight vs. latitude.

furthermore, it is worth noting that when the full spacex's system is deployed, more than 20 satellites will be within los in the most poulated areas on earth.

fig. 5 shows the frequency allocations for the different systems. for each system and frequency band, the top line represents rhcp allocaions and the bottom line represents lhcp allocations. table 2 comares the number of beams, bandwidth per beam, total bandwidth alocated per type of link and frequency reuse factor for each of the beams. the total bandwidth per satellite is computed multiplying the bandwidth per type of beam times the frequency reuse factor, which was estimated based on the total data rates reported per satellite.

on one hand, both spacex and oneweb use the ku band spectrum for their satellite to user links (both uplink and downlink), whereas satellite to ground contacts are carried out in the ka band lower (downlink) and upper (uplink) spectrum. oneweb uses rhcp polarzation for the user downlinks, and lhcp for the user uplinks; spacex uses rhcp for both uplink and downlinks, with lhcp used for teleetry data. furthermore, both systems use ka band for their gateway links: oneweb uses 155 mhz downlink channels and 250 mhz uplink channels in both rhcp and lhcp; spacex uses 250 mhz downlink channels and 500 mhz uplink channels, also in both rhcp and lhcp. on the other hand, telesat's system uses only the ka band spectrum, and hence satellite to user and satellite to ground contacts need to share the same bandwidth. given the flexibility of their digital payload, telesat's system has the capability to dynamically allocate power and bandwidth for the user and gateway beams to mitigate interference.

oneweb's system has a bent pipe architecture where each of the 16 user downlink channels maps onto a ka band gateway uplink channel, and vice versa for the return direction. spacex's and telesat's system architectures, however, allow for on board de modulation, routing and re modulation, thus effectively decoupling user and gateway links. this allows for them to: a) use different spectral efficiencies in the uplink and downlink channels, maximizing the overall capacity of their saellites, b) dynamically allocate resources for the user beams, and c) mitigate interference by selecting the frequency bands used. due to this decoupling, we estimate that both systems can achieve spectral effiiencies close to 5.5 bps/hz in their gateway links, which could result in frequency reuses of 4 5 times for spacex user links, and 4 times for telesat user beams.

given the differences in the satellite payloads on board each of the systems, the beams on each of the satellites also have significant diferences in terms of capabilities, shape, and area covered. table 3 contains a summary of the beam characteristics for all three systems. bwch: channel bandwidth #ch: number of channels k: times frequency is reused on each satellite (reuse factor) bwtot: total bandwidth. (*) indicates values estimated by the authors. telesat's lower (†) and upper (⁋) ka band spectrum is shared between user and gateway links. the number of beams and the per beam bandwidth is reconfigurable. table 2 comparison of bandwidth allocations for different types of links and different systems.

use circularly shaped beams, whereas oneweb's system uses highly elliptical beams. fig. 6 a) contains a comparison of the fields of regard, while fig. 6 b) shows the 3db footprint contours for the beams of each of the systems. note the differences in terms of the areas covered by each satellite and beams: each of oneweb's beams covers an approxmate surface area of 75,000 km2; spacex's beams have a coverage area of ∼2,800 km2; and telesat's shapeable beam's coverage area can be adjusted between 960 km2 (telesat min in fig. 6 b) and 246,000 km2 (telesat max in fig. 6 b).

2.4.4. deployment and prospective expansion strategy

table 4 contains a summary of the launch characteristics of oneeb's and spacex's mega constellations, including satellites per launch and total number of launches. at the time of writing, telesat has not released public information about their launch provider and satellite

table 3 comparison of beam characteristics for the three different systems. tt&c

uplink downlink uplink

bwch #ch bwtot k

mhz mhz mhz mhz mhz

characteristics and thus no information regarding their system is inluded.

oneweb plans to deploy its satellites through both contracts with arianespace (using 21 soyuz rocket launches) and virgin galactic (once its launcherone rocket is developed). each soyuz rocket will carry 34 to 36 satellites (depending on the rocket destination and launch site), and the contract with arianespace also includes options for 5 more soyuz launches and 3 extra ariane 6 launches. moreover, as of march of 2018 oneweb filed a new petition to the fcc to expand their constellation by adding 1260 satellites, to a total 1980 satellite constellation. this exansion would double the number of planes (from 18 to 36) and inrease the number of satellites per plane from 40 to 55 .

spacex will launch their satellites using their own launch vehicles (either falcon 9 or falcon heavy). spacex plans to utilize a two staged deployment, with an initial deployment of 1600 satellites (and the

user beam uplink gateway beams uplink

spacex oneweb telesat spacex oneweb telesat

system beginning operations after the launch of the first 800 satellites), and a later deployment of the 2825 remaining satellites. the initial deployment will allow spacex to offer services in the ± 60° latitude band, and once the final deployment is launched, global coverage will be offered.

finally, in recent press releases telesat has revealed that, depending on business results, they are considering expansions of their constellaion by staged deployments that will bring up the total number of saellites progressively to 192, 292, and finally 512.

in addition to their ku ka band systems, all three companies have filed applications to launch larger constellations in q/v band, comining satellites in leo and meo. the description and analysis of these q/v band constellations is beyond the scope of this paper.

for financing their endeavors and manufacturing their satellites the

three companies have also taken different approaches.

oneweb has created a partnership in which a significant number of shares of the company are owned by qualcomm (20.17%), softbank (19.98%), and airbus (13.34%) (among others) , with each of their partners playing a specific role in the system design. for instance, airbus is manufacturing the satellites; qualcomm will provide oneweb user base stations; hughes network systems will provide the gateway equipment. in terms of financing, oneweb raised $500 million from its strategic partners in an initial funding round, and softbank further inested a total of $1.5 billion in a private equity round .

spacex is using an in house manufacturing strategy, with most parts of the satellite bus developed internally. integration, assembly, and testing tasks will also be conducted in spacex's facilities. even though spacex has not provided information about the funding prospects for their constellation, a recent $1b financing round has included google and fidelity .

finally, most of telesat's system design and manufacturing will be outsourced to different companies. even though the manufacturer of

table 4 launch characteristics of oneweb's and spacex's systems. fig. 7. overview of the methodology employed to determine the ground segent location and estimate total system throughput.

their satellites has not been decided yet, they have in place contracts with thales maxar and airbus for each to further develop a system deign and submit a firm proposal, whereas global eagle and general dynamics mission systems will be in charge of developing their user terminals. in terms of financing, telesat indicates in their fcc appliation that they are willing to invest "significant financial resources" (of their own) and suggested that they will resort to the capital markets for additional funding.

3. methodology and model description

this section presents the methods that we used to characterize the ground segment requirements and to estimate system performance. fig. 7 shows an overview of the models developed (grey shaded, rounded boxes) and the inputs required (white boxes).

the methodology to estimate total system throughput (sellable caacity) consists of two steps. first, the locations and number of feeder gateways are computed by means of a genetic algorithm. second, the ground segment locations are combined with atmospheric models, link budget models, and orbital dynamic models to statistically determine the total system throughput.

the rest of this section is devoted to describing each of these models and inputs: section 3.1 presents the atmospheric models used; section 3.2 presents the link budget assumptions and parameters; section 3.3 presents the demand model used; section 3.4 describes the methoology used to optimize the ground segment; and finally, section 3.5 introduces the methodology used to statistically estimate the total system throughput.

atmospheric attenuation is the main external factor that affects the performance of a communications link. at ka band frequencies, atmohe link capacity, spheric attenuation can cause a reduction of

sometimes even complete outages for non negligible periods of time. to deal with the varying fades and maximize the link data rate at any point in time, adaptive coding and modulation strategies are commonly used. in other words, the modulation and coding scheme (modcod) is dyamically selected to maximize the spectral efficiency achievable under current weather conditions.

in this study, we implemented the international teleommunication union (itu) models for atmospheric attenuation for slant path links following the guidelines provided in recommendation itu r p.618 13 , (which considers gaseous, clouds, tropospheric scintillation and rain impairments). these recommendations provide the attenuation contribution values due to each of the aforementioned events vs. the percentage of time those values are exceeded, (i.e., the cumulative distribution function (cdf) for the atmospheric attenuation contributions). in particular, recommendations itu r p.676 11 and itu r p.840 7 are used to compute the gaseous and clouds attenuations respectively, while the maps in recommendations itu r p.837 6, itu r p.838 3, and itu r p.839 4 are used to estimate the rainfall rate, rain specific attenuation, and rain height respectively. for example, fig. 8 shows the total atmospheric attenuation experienced in boston for the different frequency bands.

the link budget module is combined with the atmospheric models to compute the achievable data rates for the uplink and downlink communications under different atmospheric conditions. our codemplementation for the link budget is parametric and is designed to allow for fast computation of the optimal modcod scheme for each combination of ground station and operating conditions. moreover, it is designed to handle both bent pipe architectures, where a frequency translation occurs between uplink and downlink, as well as reenerative architectures, where the uplink and downlink links use diferent modcod schemes.

for our performance estimation model, we assumed that the modlation coding schemes prescribed in the standard dvb s2x , deeloped by the digital video broadcast project in 2014, are used, since it is the predominant standard for broadcasting, broadband satellite communication, and interactive services. the standard defines the framing structure, channel coding, and a set of modulation schemes. in particular, more than 60 modcods are included, with modulations ranging from bpsk to 256 apsk and coding rates from ¼ to ⁹∕₁₀. we assumed a frame error rate (fer) was 10−7, as suggested in the dvb2x implementation guidelines. table 5 beam link budgets for the gateway uplink (upper ka band) for the three systems considered. different ranges and elevation angles considered (atmospheric atenuation values for availability of 99.5%).

parameter telesat oneweb spacex

frequencya bandwidtha tx. antenna da eirp modcod

bps/hz km deg db db dbi k db/k db db db db db db db db mbps db

tx correspond to transmit value, rx to reception value, and g/t is the gain to noise temperature factor of the antenna.

a values extracted from fcc filings. rest of the values estimated or derived

from link budget equations.

percentile power and the average power) to avoid distortion due to saturation.

the rest of the parameters in the link budgets include the diameters, efficiencies, and noise temperatures of the transmitter and receiver antennas, as well as the values for the different losses over the rf chain and the carrier to interference values. we extract the values for these parameters from the link budget examples detailed on each of the aplications filed with the fcc. table 5 and table 6 contain gateway and user link budget examples in the forward direction for each of the systems.

to derive realistic estimates of the total system throughput, we developed a demand model that provides an upper bound to the maxmum sellable capacity for any satellite at a given orbital position. our demand model intentionally focuses on serving end users and serving as back haul infrastructure to expand existing networks (e.g., cell phone), as opposed to satisfying the demands of other markets (such as military, in flight, marine, off shore connectivity, etc.). this decision was delibrate as most of the current leo constellation proposals emphasize offering global bandwidth access for end users.

the demand model was generated as follow. for a given orbital altitude, we generated a gridded map (of resolution 0.1° × 0.1° in laitude and longitude) that determines the number of people covered by the beams of a satellite located in a particular orbital position, using the gridded population of the world v4 dataset, which estimates the poulation counts for the year 2020 over a 30 arc second resolution grid based on census data. we also take into account the minimum elevation angle constraints imposed by each of the satellites. furtherore, we assumed that users in a region are evenly distributed across all the satellites within their los. table 6 beam link budgets, computed at the edge of the user downlink beam's footprints, for the three systems considered. (atmospheric attenuation values for availbility of 99%).

fig. 9. user demand data rate for different orbital positions.

each cell of the grid, and that the average data rate requested per user is 300 kbps (which amounts to ∼100 gb a month). finally, the demand is see section 4.2), capped at the maximum data rate per satellite ( as shown in eq. (1) (where is the number of satellites within los of a ground location).

fig. 9 shows the demand data rate for oneweb's constellation. the regions with higher demand are displayed in bright tone, while the regions with lower demand are in darker tones, and regions where demand is zero are not colored. ocovcov0.50.5.9599 = +

while minimizing the number of ground stations required. in eq. (2), represent the percentage of orbital positions that are covered by a ground station under atmospheric conditions present less than 5% and less than 1% of the time respectively. we assumed that the minimum elevation angle for a ground stations to communicate with a satellite is 10°. cov95

mathematically, this optimization problem can be framed as a down selecting problem, where we need to pick the n ground stations that offer the best performance. we consider a pool of 160 different locations spread across the world, which results in a search space of 2168 3.8·1049 points, which makes impossible its full enumeration and evaluation. therefore the use of optimization algorithms is called for. given its structure, genetic algorithms are well suited to solve down selecting problems . we employ the non dominated sorting genetic algorithm ii (nsga ii) an efficient multi objective genetic algorithm, which operates as follows:

1. generate a random population of npop architectures (populated using random subsets of ground stations)

2. evaluate the value of the objective function o (eq. (2)) for each of

3. select n/2 architectures that are the "parents" on the next genera

tion population, attending to the following criteria a. architectures with lower pareto ranking are selected first. b. among architectures with similar pareto ranking, those with

lower crowding distance are selected first.

4. apply the crossover genetic operator over the n/2 parent archiectures. the crossover operator takes as inputs two parents and produces two offspring. every ground station present in each parent is assigned to one of their offspring with equal probability (i.e., we use uniform crossover over the ground stations on each parent). in total, n/2 offspring are produced from the n/2 parents.

5. apply the mutation genetic operator over the n/2 parent archiectures and the n/2 offspring architectures. mutation removes a ground station from an architecture with probability premove, and adds a new ground station with probability padd. the mutation oprator is applied with probability pmut.

6. repeat steps 2 5 until a termination criterion (i.e. maximum number of generations ngen evaluated, no new architectures in the pareto front) is met.

furthermore, we exploit the geographical structure of the problem to speed up the convergence of the optimization algorithm. given that the selection of ground stations in one region has a small impact on which ground station are selected in another region, we divide the optimization in two phases. first, in phase a, we determine the optimal ground segment architectures for each of the 6 regions considered (africa, asia, europe, north america, oceania, and south america) (npop = 200, algorithm described using ngen = 200). second, in phase b, we apply our nsga ii algorithm globally, but instead of generating a random population (step 1), we use the pareto front architectures from the region based optimization in phase a as the generating components for the initial population. in other words, a ground segment architecture for phase b is generated by choosing a pareto optimal ground segment architectures from each of the regions in phase a. this new population serves as the initial poulation for the phase b nsga ii algorithm (npop = 200, ngen = 80). the nsga ii above

3.5. total system throughput estimation

to evaluate the system throughput we developed a computational model that provides an upper bound to the maximum sellable capacity for each of the mega constellations. the need for this statistical model is due to the fact that 1) the system dynamics by which the number of (2)

customers and gateways within los of each satellite varies over time, and 2) the atmospheric conditions that introduce varying attenuation fading and thus, varying data rates are also stochastic by nature.

the procedure to determine the total system throughput is as folows. first, we propagated the orbits of the satellites on the constellaion for a day, using a 60 s time step. then, for each orbital configration, we drew 10,000 atmospheric attenuation samples for each ground station, assuming that the atmospheric attenuation samples are statistically independent and distributed according to the probability distribution curve computed with the atmospheric model (for example, for boston, the cdfs at different frequencies are shown in fig. 8). these samples were then used as inputs to the link budget module to estimate the achievable link data rates for each of the ground stations. finally, the total system throughput is computed in two different ways, deending on whether the satellite has inter satellite links.

the throughput of each satellite ( ) is computed according to eq. (3), where dsat is the user demand, and represents the sum of the data rate ( ) of the n best performing ground stations. this is done for each orbital position and set of atmospheric conditions, resulting in 14.4 million samples. the total system forward capacity for each of the (we call a scenario a combination of orbital posicenarios tions + atmospheric conditions) is computed by adding the throughput of each satellite. the constellation does not have inter satellite links,

on the other hand, if inter satellite links are present, the following four step procedure is followed to compute the total system throughput:

1) compute the total system forward capacity that could potentially be

transmitted using all the available feeder gateways.

2) compute the cdf of the total system forward capacity by ordering

3) select a subset of 1,000 scenarios evenly spaced on the cdf curve to conduct further analysis taking into account the inter satellite links.

a. construct a network graph where the users on each satellite, the satellites themselves, and the ground stations are the nodes of the graph, and the rf links are the edges. the cost of the inter saellite links is set to 1, while the cost of the rest of the links is set to 0. the capacity of each edge is determined by

i. the demand captured by the satellite in the case of users sa

ii. the inter satellite link data rate in case of satellite satellite

iii. the gateway link data rate in the case of gateway satellite

b. solve the "minimum cost, maximum flow" problem and de

termine the flow from each satellite to the gateways.

c. compute the total system throughput by adding the flows from

this section summarizes other assumptions made within our

user demand is concentrated in land areas and is proportional to the population under reach by a satellite. maritime or aeronautical deand is not considered.

customers with multiple satellites within los select one randomly to communicate with, and thus demand is evenly distributed among satellites within los. gateway links, thus for any orbital position and atmospheric conitions the modcod that maximizes the throughput is selected. • satellites produce enough power to communicate at maximum eirp • user terminals are not a limiting factor, as they are capable of tracking satellites continuously and communicating at the required data rates. whenever required.

there are no outages caused by foliage, building obstruction, or • performance degradation due to interference among leo satellites • ground stations can be located over any land area. there are no political, landing rights, or geographical constraints to their placeent. from different constellations is not considered. other factors in the user links at any elevation angle.

isls links can be used to route excess demand to other satellites. only satellites in the same orbital set can communicate through isl (both in plane and cross plane).

there is no maximum number of hops that data can traverse through isl, even though latency shall be minimized.

this section presents the results for: a) the ground segment reuirements for each of the systems and b) the total system throughput analysis, which, as mentioned in section 3.3, corresponds to an upper bound estimation of the total sellable capacity in the forward direction. within these results, we use the term ground station to refer to each of the sites that host one or more feeder antennas, whereas the term gateway antenna refers to the actual dishes located at those sites. it is important to note that there is a limit on the number of gateway anennas per ground station, since there must be a minimum angular separation maintained between antenna pointing directions to prevent interference. based on the minimum angular separation values found in the fcc filings of the three systems, a reasonable value for the maxmum number of gateway antennas per site is 50, even though a high degree of coordination among antennas would be required to operate without interference. a more realistic scenario limits the number of antennas per ground station to 30.

fig. 10 presents the pareto fronts for the number of locations vs. demand region coverage for the three systems analyzed. it can be oberved that oneweb's system requires 61 ground stations to achieve full coverage, whereas telesat's and spacex's systems cannot cover the whole demand region using only ground stations. this happens because given the larger fields of regard of the satellites, there are orbital poitions where a satellite has some population within their for, even though the elevation angle to the corresponding ground station is too low to close the link for atmospheric conditions which are present 95% of the time. however, neither spacex's nor telesat's systems need to achieve 100% coverage of the demand region, as isl links can be used to route the data from satellites out of the coverage region to satellites that are actually within the coverage region. fig. 11. estimated total system forward capacity vs number of ground station locations for a) telesat's, b) spacex's, and c) oneweb's systems. d) shows the estimated system forward capacity if oneweb's systems included optical isl (oisl). values in parenthesis indicate the maximum number of gateway antennas per ground station location.

one should also note that having 100% coverage of the demand region does not guarantee operation at maximum system capacity, as some ground stations might operate at lower data rates due to low elevation angles. conversely, not having total coverage of the demand region does not imply that the maximum system throughput cannot be attained, as satellites might use isl to route data within the network. with that in mind, fig. 11 shows the estimated total system throughput vs. number of ground stations for the three systems analyzed. average values (over time) are plotted using a continuous line, whereas the shaded region represents interquartile values (i.e., the capacity varies over time, and is contained within the shadow regions for 25 75% of the time). isl data rates of 5, 10, and 20 gbps are considered for telsat's and spacex's constellations, and are represented in orange, green and blue respectively. magenta lines correspond to the performance of the systems without isl.

from the graph, we can see that the maximum total system throughput for oneweb's, telesat's and spacex's constellations are 1.56 tbps, 2.66 tbps and 23.7 tbps respectively. moreover, it is shown that spacex's system is the system that benefits the most from the use of isls, and that it requires the largest number of ground stations to achieve its maximum capacity (a total of 123), due to the large number of satellites in their constellation. interestingly, the number of locations required by the oneweb's system (71) is larger than those required by telesat (42), even though the maximum capacity of the former is lower. fig. 11 d shows the same results for oneweb's system if isls were added to the system design (4 isl per satellite, 2 in plane, and 2 crosslanes). it can be observed that the addition of isls significantly reuces the requirements of the ground segment; even with low isl dataates of 5 gbps, the system can achieve maximum performance with as little as 27 ground stations.

numerical values for the estimated total system throughput for each of the systems and different gateway and ground station scenarios are tabulated in table 7. using a ground segment with 50 ground station

table 7 estimated total system throughput (tbps) for different ground stations and number of gateways.

ngs: number of ground station locations. capacity values in tbps. in parenthesis, the maximum number of gateways allowed at each ground station location. † hypothetical scenarios as oneweb's system does not have isls. locations (and, as mentioned before, under reasonable assumptions with regard to the maximum number of gateways per location), oneeb's systems attains a capacity of 1.47 tbps, while telesat's and spacex's systems achieve 2.65 tbps and 16.78 tbps respectively.

note that even though oneweb's system has a significantly larger number of satellites than telesat's, its total system capacity is lower. this is due to the following reasons:

spectrum utilization strategy: as described in section 2.4.2, oneeb's constellation only uses one of the polarizations in the ku band spectrum, with a reuse factor of 2. this results in a lower total available bandwidth for the user downlinks than spacex's and telsat's systems. the user downlinks are, as explained next in this section, indeed the limiting factor in oneweb's system.

orbital configuration and number of satellites in los: as shown in section 2.4.1, both telesat's and spacex's systems concentrate a set of satellites over the most populated regions of the earth, whereas oneweb's use of polar orbits results in their satellites flying over uninhabited regions for longer periods of time. moreover, regions with very high demands can be better served by spacex's and telsat's systems since there are more satellites within los of such reions.

early saturation of beams: since oneweb lacks the flexibility to allocate resources dynamically to specific beams, some beams will be saturated even when the satellite as a whole is not saturated, which results in demand being dropped.

lack of isl links: the lack of isl links results in oneweb's satellites not being able to always downlink their data to a ground station, especially for scenarios with a low number of ground stations. from table 7, we see that if isls were used, the total system capacity could be 10%, 6% and 1% higher when 30, 50, and 65 ground station locations (respectively) are considered as compared with the no isl case.

as mentioned before, oneweb's system is heavily constrained by the satellite to user links, which is the main reason for its lower overall performance in terms of data rate. table 8 shows the average and peak data rate per satellite in the forward direction, considering both the gateway to satellite and the satellite to user links. since telesat and spacex have digital payloads with demodulation and re modulation capabilities, these two links can be decoupled and considered inividually. there are significant differences among the average dataates of the satellites from different constellations; telesat's satellites achieve average data rates close to 36 gbps, thanks to the use of two independent gateway antennas; spacex achieve data rates close to 20 gbps (vs. 17 23 gbps reported in spacex's fcc filing ), whereas oneweb satellites average 8.8 gbps (vs. previously reported 8 gbps per satellite). the differences in these values are because the gateway toatellite links are the limiting factor for spacex and telesat constellaions, whereas oneweb's satellites are limited by the satellite to user links. both spacex and telesat can use the highest available modcods (256apsk) in their gateway uplinks most of the time, while oneweb's user links use 32 apsk as their highest spectral efficiency modcod.

if we refer to the analysis of the number of gateways vs. throughput as shown in fig. 12, we observe that the number of gateway antennas required by each of the mega constellations to support the maximum total system throughput is 3,500, 220, and 800 for spacex (assuming 20 gbps isl), telesat (10 gbps isl) and oneweb respectively. as expected, this number is heavily dependent on the number of satellites. from these graphs two main conclusions can be drawn: first, spacex's system is the one that benefits the most from the use of isls, whereas telesat is the one that benefits the least (given the low number of satellites in their constellation); second, spacex's total capacity flattens out quickly after having more than 2,500 gateway antennas (using 20 gbps isl), which indicates that their system can afford significant savings by reucing the number of gateway antennas without this having a sigificant impact on its total system throughput (6% reduction). finally, it is also noteworthy the gains that oneweb's system stand to make if they had chosen to use isls; for a 500 gateway system their total caacity could increase 33%, from 1.2 tbps to 1.6 tbps. a total of 800 gateways would be required to achieve a similar capacity of 1.6 tbps without isls.

fig. 13 shows the relationship between number of ground stations, number of gateway antennas, and system throughput for telesat's and oneweb's systems. it can be observed that for telesat the system caacity is mainly driven by the number of gateway antennas (as there is little variation of throughput in the horizontal direction), whereas for oneweb the throughput depends on both the number of antennas and of ground station locations.

finally, table 9 contains a summary of the result values presented in this paper. it is interesting to compare the efficiency of these systems, in terms of average throughput per satellite, versus the maximum dataate achievable per satellite. in that regard, telesat's system achieves the highest efficiency with an average of 22.74 gbps per satellite (58.8% of its maximum data rate per satellite), whereas spacex and oneweb achieve 5.36 gbps and 2.17 gbps (25.1% and 21.7% of their maximum per satellite capacity respectively). this difference in satellite efficiency is mainly due to two architectural decisions of telesat's system: having dual active gateway antennas aboard the satellite, and having a lower minimum elevation angle on the user side. fig. 13. capacity vs. number of ground stations and number of gateway anennas for a) telesat and b) oneweb.

the lower portion of table 9 shows the results for a hypothetical scenario where all three systems have 50 ground stations. note how in this case spacex's system would be the most adversely affected, with its total throughput reduced by 30% to 16.5 tbps, whereas oneweb's system throughput would be reduced by 6% to 1.47 tbps. telesat's system would not be affected, since it only requires 40 ground stations to operate at maximum capacity.

this section introduces five different technical challenges that will

need to be overcome before these systems become operational.

given the large number of satellites deployed in each of the proosals, coordination to mitigate in line events interference will be an important aspect for these. in line interference can occur between an ngso satellite and a gso satellite (when leo satellites cross the equator line and have beams pointing to the nadir direction), and beween two close ngso satellites of different constellations whose beams point to the same location and operate in the same frequency.

with regards to ngso gso interference, each proposal has a diferent mitigation strategy. while oneweb has proposed a progressive satellite pitch adjustment maneuver paired with selective disabling of beams, spacex and telesat rely on the steerable and shapeable capbilities of their beams and the fact that multiple satellite are within los for users on the equator. in all cases, the objective is to ensure that the leo beams are not aligned to the gso satellites beams, so that a minimum angular separation between beams is maintained (minimum discrimination angle).

for ngso ngso in line events, given the proposed frequency alocations, interference might occur between oneweb's and spacex's downlink user beams, as well as between oneweb's, spacex's, and telesat's gateways beams (both uplinks and downlinks). furthermore, since telesat's is a ka band only system, their user beams might also interfere with the other systems' gateway beams. in cases of ngso to ngso in line events, both controlling companies will need to cordinate to mitigate the interference, by using different frequency channels over the same spot, disabling beams, or splitting the spectrum. while both telesat and spacex have by design mechanisms to avoid interferences (e.g., multiple satellites in los, steerable and shapeable beams, dynamic bandwidth channelization), oneweb's design lacks such flexibility and therefore it can only take a passive role in the cordination process.

spacex and telesat will each use a digital payload with a high deree of flexibility built in. as previously mentioned, both systems plan to use this flexibility as a mechanism to avoid interference, but also to maximize the throughput of each individual satellite by allocating its resources to the beams covering the regions with the highest demands. given the fast paced changing environment (orbital position, intererence from other systems, user demand, atmospheric attenuation, etc.) and the large number of beams and satellites involved, advanced dynamic resource allocation management (drm) algorithms will need to be developed.

furthermore, since multiple satellites in a constellation will have to coordinate (i.e., ensure coverage of all users without causing intererence to external satellites), some of these drm algorithms will need to be run in a control center which has knowledge of the internal state of each satellite and also an overview of the whole constellation state. another set of drm algorithms will then need to be run locally onoard of each satellite to handle the rapid changing environment of the satellites.

together, these three systems will add more than 5000 satellites to leo. launching them into orbit would require approximately 100 150 dedicated rocket launches in the next 4 years, which would require a significant increase in the number of launches worldwide, (in particular the soyuz and falcon 9 rockets). in 2017 alone, the number of orbital launches worldwide was 91; 18 of them were falcon 9 rockets and 15 were soyuz rockets.

in addition, even though at the time of writing all three companies have manufactured test satellites for their systems (spacex and telesat have even launched them into orbit at the beginning of 2018), it is not clear whether the companies will be able to finalize the design and production of the satellites according to their planned schedules. in fact, some of the companies have already been forced to slightly delay their original launches and push back the beginning of operations. telesat oneweb spacex

the large number of satellites in mega constellations impose new operational challenges in terms of collision avoidance and end of life disposal. in that regard, the ground infrastructure shall continuously monitor, track, and command hundreds of satellites, as well as to cordinate with other agencies and organizations with spacecraft flying in similar orbits (that may present a risk of collision). moreover, since telemetry, internal state and network status signals from hundreds of ngso satellites will need to be continuously monitored, a degree of automation higher than current state of the art systems will be reuired.

affordable user terminals capable of tracking leo satellites are a key component for widespread adoption and crucial to the business success of the three systems analyzed here. in the past, broadband leo networks required expensive terminals composed of gimballed anennas (often a pair of them to guarantee continuous coverage), which limited their adoption to customers with high purchasing power, mainly within the enterprise market.

electrically steered flat panel antennas are a promising technology in this field, even though it is still unclear whether this technology will be available at the desired price points when the constellations begin service. with respect to the design of the user terminals for each of the systems, telesat compatible terminals present the most stringent reuirements, since their antennas will need to operate at elevation anles as low as 20° (vs. 40° and 55° for spacex and oneweb respecively).

this paper presents a comparison of the technical architecture of three large constellations of satellites in leo to provide global broadand. after providing a description of the space and ground segment architectures for each of the systems, we compared some additional aspects of each constellation in detail. then, we presented a method to a) determine the requirements in terms of number of ground stations and gateways in the ground segment for each of the systems, and b) estimate statistically the total system throughput. we concluded the paper by emphasizing several technical challenges that will need to be overcome before these systems become operational, such as intererence coordination, dynamic resource management, launch schedule, and operations.