a transportable reflectarray antenna for satellite ku band emergency communications

simone montori, fabrizio cacciamani, roberto vincenti gatti, roberto sorrentino, guido arista, carolina tienda, jose a. encinar, giovanni toso

abstract—the design of a ku band reconfigurable reflectarray antenna for emergency satellite communications is presented. bidirectional high data rate satellite links are needed in emergency telecommunication infrastructures are not available. in order to operate in this type of scenario, an antenna should be deployable, transportable and easily repointable. the need of an automatic and fast satellite location and pointing system leads to a completely electronic reconfigurable antenna. the operative bandwidth is from 10.7 ghz to 12.5 ghz for reception and from 14 ghz up to 14.5 ghz for transmission (30% of relative bandwidth). the selected antenna architecture is based on a dual reflectarray system comprising a passive sub reflectarray and an active main reflectarray made of reconfigurable 1 bit elementary cells based on pin diodes.

lectronically reconfigurable reflectarray antennas have been recently considered for several satellite applications requiring antennas able to guarantee an automatic scanning and tracking, a coverage modification, and robustness against interferences.

reflectarrays combine advantages of both reflector and phased array antennas. in fact, similarly to printed arrays, they can be fabricated by low cost conventional photo etching techniques. moreover, by properly modifying the phase shift applied by the planar reflecting surface, reflectarrays have been demonstrated able to provide high gain focused beam, contoured beams [1 3] and the possibility to dynamically steer the beam by using phase shifters integrated into the reflecting elements. as well as the reflector antennas, the free space feeding of the reflectarrays eliminates the loss and the parasitic effects associated with conventional rf distribution

this work been carried out in the framework of reskue project (esacontract n° 22078/08/nl/st), supported by european space agency (esa). s. montori f. cacciamani are with rf microtech s.r.l., perugia, italy (e mail: montori@rfmicrotech.com cacciamani@rfmicrotech.com). r. v. gatti and prof r. sorrentino are with university of perugia dept. of engineering, roberto.vincentigatti@unipg.it (e mail: roberto.sorrentino@unipg.it). guido arista is with elital s.r.l., l'aquila, italy (guido.arista@elital.com). prof. jose a. encinar and carolina tienda are with universidad (e mail encinar@etc.upm.es tienda@etc.upm.it) g. toso is with esa/estec, nordwijk, netherland (email: giovanni.toso@esa.int,) a)

b) fig. 1. prototype of the designed reflectarray: operative configuration(a) and stowed configuration (b).

networks, allowing an increase of the antenna efficiency especially in wide aperture antennas . for these reasons they represent a good solution for applications requiring a dynamical reconfigurability of the radiation pattern.

electronic reconfigurability of reflectarray elements is typically accomplished by integrating in the elementary cells solid state tuning devices like pin diodes or varactor diodes, rf mems (micro electro mechanical systems) or liquid crystals (lc).

voltage controlled tuning varactors provide a variable capacitive reactance which modifies the electrical length of the patch and consequently the relative phase shift applied on the reflected signal [5 9]. while the varactors offer a continuous variation of the state of the elementary cell, the pin diodes allow only two possible states (onnd off state) the design of reconfigurable cells with digital phase shifting. a digitally controlled cell with fixed states has the potential of being more reliable than the analog counterpart showing advantages in leading to 1

operational stability and compatibility with digital control circuits [10 11].

liquid crystal based reflectarrays exploits the physical response of the lc molecules to an electric field: the permittivity of the lc substrate and, consequently, the response of the elementary cells is tuned applying a simple biasing circuit [12 15].

mems based reflectarray elementary cells can be used both as analog (variation of the mems capacitance) or digital devices. in the second case, the mems are used as switches (with onnd an off state) that can selectively activate some parts of the elementary cell [17 20]. thanks to their high performance, especially in terms of losses and dc power consumption, rf mems are a promising class of tunable devices at high frequencies where semiconductor based counterparts suffer from unavoidable limitations. mems still exhibit high reliability problems.

an electronically switching beam reflectarray antenna in xand has been designed, manufactured and tested, using pin diodes as switching device . the beam was switched to three fix pointing directions ( 5º , 0º, 5º) by a simple biasing strategy, in which all the diodes in each half of the antenna were identically biased. a real beam scanning antenna requires much effort in designing the reconfigurable elements and the dc control circuits, particularly because of the very large number of reconfigurable cells required. the problem is more severe when the antenna should operate simultaneously in transmit and receive frequencies and fulfil stringent requirements on side lobes and cross polarization, as is the case in satellite communications.

in this paper an innovative ku band pin diode based reconfigurable reflectarray antenna for bi directional satellite links is proposed.

a reconfigurable ku band satellite antenna is characterized by stringent electrical requirements: bi directional links impose a dual polarization operation and an operative bandwidth relative bandwidth) to be satisfied with a tunable phase distribution of the reflecting surface. moreover, in order to provide a reasonable bit rate and the accomplishment of the itu and etsi regulatory masks [22 23], additional specifications on the antenna pattern and gain have to be imposed. in particular, the gain (>32dbi) and the level of the side lobes (on the geo stationary arc) required by the regulatory masks can be accomplished adopting a wide aperture antenna geometry. the consequently high number of reconfigurable elementary cells to be manufactured and controlled is an issue that, in the proposed design, has been overcome by adopting cells with 1it phase discretization. the 1 bit phase discretization has been successfully investigated, showing the possibility to effectively steer the beam without grating lobes [24 25]. the advantage of this kind of solution is the reduced number of integrated devices to be employed on each elementary cell which leads to a reduction of the manufacturing cost and to a simplified biasing architecture.

the issues on the reconfigurability, the large operative 100 feed point 400 200 1000

fig. 2. antenna configuration of the main reflector in deployed (a) and stowed (b) configuration.

bandwidth and the dual polarization of the elementary cell have been solved by employing a pin diode based architecture where the use of a multi resonators structure guarantees a frequency response stable in the entire bandwidth, moreover the use of a 90° bended resonator allows the cell to be switched between two states with a phase shift that is constantly 180°.

the aim of this work is to describe the main features of the proposed reconfigurable dual reflector antenna and to prove the effectiveness of the design in order to electronically control the radiation pattern. the paper is organized as follows. section ii describes the effects of the 1 bit phase discretization on the radiation pattern. section iii describes the proposed dual reflector antenna configuration: the main and sub reflector architecture, the feeding horn design and the arrangement of the three elements. in section iv, the principle of operation and the structure of the elementary cell are described and the effectiveness of the design is proved through experimental results. section v reports the main aspects of the mechanical design of the antenna and the control circuit architecture are described. in section vi, the experimental validation of the designed prototype is reported: a fulleconfigurable demonstrator with 5250 elementary cells has been manufactured and tested (fig. 1.). measured radiation patterns compared with the predicted ones are reported in order to validate the proposed design.

reconfigurable reflectarrays are based on elementary cells with a high number of states or based on analog control, a different approach is adopted in the proposed design. while conventional

the need of an high antenna gain and low side lobe level leads to a wide radiating aperture. due to the large number of required elements, cost and complexity of the whole system 2

g) fig. 3. effects of the phase discretization on the pattern produced by a planar reflectarray, illuminated by a gaussian feed, with aperture described in fig. 2(a). (a), (b) and (c) report the phase distribution on the planar reflector in case of 1 bit, 2 bits and 8 bits phase discretization. (d), (e) and (f) show the 2 d polar plot of the antenna gain in the three cases, while (g), (h) and (f) report the elevation cut of the same patterns.

fig. 4. antenna configuration with sub reflector of 47.5cm × 60cm and equivalent feed position for the antenna analysis of fig. 3.

become critical issues. a 1 bit phase resolution is therefore adopted. the feasibility of such a solution, investigated and assessed in [24 25], is shown through an example: a planar reflectarray illuminated by a gaussian feed pointed to the centre of the antenna has been simulated. the dimensions of the reflectarray, reported in fig. 2, are the same of the one developed during the project. the radiation patterns (fig. 3) c)

the quadratic phase distribution of the impinging spherical wave coming from the source helps in overcoming the quantization errors due to the 1 bit phase shifters. by comparing the results obtained with 2 bit and 8 bit phase shifters, a reduction of the antenna gain up to 5db can be observed, together with a small increase of the sll. however, the main lobe pointing direction and the beam width remain unchanged in the 3 cases. these properties have been achieved by properly selecting the feed position and reflectarray dimensions, after a parametric study.

iii. antenna geometry

the antenna proposed in this paper is a dual reflectarray made up of three components: a primary feed, a passive rectangular sub reflectarray and a pentagonal active maineflectarray (fig. 4) with 1 bit electronic control of the elementary cells. the antenna is designed to provide a directive beam with electronic scanning capabilities within a limited angular range (+/ 5° with respect to a nominal direction) 3

b) fig. 5. multi layer sub reflector made of varying sized patches. (a) exploded view of the three layer reflectarray. periodic cell (b).

the aim of this work is the design and manufacturing of a reflectarray for broadband emergency communications, hence a foldable antenna architecture allowing portability and size reduction is required. these aspects represent a remarkable limitation that has been overcome adopting a geometry of both the mainnd the sub reflector based on a rectangular shape with dimensions a and b. the sub reflector is a simple rectangular multilayer panel while the main reflector is a pentagon made up by an a×b rectangle and three "petals" that, in stowed configuration, are folded above the rectangle and in operative configuration are deployed as shown in fig. 2.

in order to optimize the geometry of the antenna and in particular the size of a and b, an exhaustive analysis has been performed in terms of eirp over rf transmit band and gain . the requirements are 32dbi of antenna gain and 32dbw/40khz of maximum eirp in the pointing direction together with the accomplishment of the regulatory masks etsi en.301.428 and itu r s.728.1. the analysis has been carried out considering a single reflector antenna: a main reflector with a 1 bit reconfigurable phase distribution and a fig. 7. manufactured sub reflector mounted on the final prototype.

fig. 8. feeding horn: (a) side view, (b) front view, (c) picture of the manufactured horn mounted on the final prototype.

dual band and dual polarization gaussian feed pointed to the centre of the reflector. the feed relative position with respect to the centre of the antenna (h, θfeed) has been optimized as well. the optimal main reflector conformed to the required value of eirp and gain is a pentagon build around a rectangle with size a=50cm, b=60cm. this reflectarray comprises 5250 elementary cells with lattice of 10mmx10mm. the optimal feed position is defined by h=300cm and θfeed=38°.

b. sub reflector design

in order to reduce the dimensions and facilitate the folding and the the antenna, a dual reflector configuration has been adopted. the sub reflectarray has been designed considering an elliptical feed whose phase centre is located at coordinates (300mm, 0mm, 30mm) with respect to the reference system shown in fig. 4. the feed is pointed toward the centre of the sub reflector. transportation of

the optimization of the sub reflector has been carried out in order to provide a phase and amplitude distribution of the field incident on the main reflector (both vnd h pol.) equivalent to the distribution used for the optimization of the maineflector. the analysis is performed using an in house developed tool for the accurate modeling of dual reflectarray antennas described in . the resulting configuration of the 4

c) fig. 9 simulated amplitude of the incident field on the main reflector at 12.75ghz: (a) amplitude of the v pol.(co pol.), (b) amplitude of the h pol. (cross pol.), (c) phase of the v pol. (co pol). (d) example of 1 bit phase distribution on the main reflector (pointing direction 45° elevation, 0° azimuth).

sub reflector is an array of 38x48 elements with square lattice 12.5mmx12.5mm (size: 475mmx600mm) whose centre is positioned at coordinates ( 473mm, 0mm, 690mm). the subeflector is inclined 27.5° with respect to the x y plane. as shown in fig. 5 and fig. 6, the sub reflector is made of a three layer printed array made of varying sized stacked patches. the required phase shift of each element is achieved by properly optimizing the patch dimensions. the manufactured sub reflector is depicted in fig. 7.

the feed used to illuminate the sub reflector is a custom elliptical horn excited with a circular waveguide wc 75. the horn optimization was focused on the ratio between the semixes of the ellipse and has been carried out in parallel with the sub reflector optimization in order to provide for both v pol and h pol the required field distribution on the main reflector surface. the resulting horn model and a picture of the manufactured prototype are shown in fig. 8.

fig. 9 shows the cond cross polarized field distribution on the main reflector at 12.75ghz. the field is computed considering the effects of the designed feeding horn and the sub reflector. the same figure reports also an example of 1 bit phase distribution on the main reflector, which corresponds to the beam pointed to 45º in elevation.

iv. reconfigurable reflectarray unit cell

in the proposed reflectarray, the reconfigurable unit cell is a pin diode based element with large bandwidth (30% of relative bandwidth), dual linear polarization and 1 bit of relative phase shift.

the geometry of the proposed elementary cell is a stacked b)

structure made up of 6 substrates bonded together with prepreg thin layers (prepreg arlon 47n). the substrate used for the rf parts is arlon ad450 while the spacers are obtained by milled fr4 layers. fig. 10 shows the exploded view of unit cell: a circular patch is printed on the top face of the upper substrate. on the lower substrate, the phase shifting layer controls the phase of the reflected signal by means of two pin diodes and provides a ±90° rotation to the incident polarization. the patch is separated from the phase shifting layer through a spacer milled on a fr4 substrate. below the phase shifting layer another fr4 substrate separates the ground plane. the dc biasing of the pin diodes is obtained through a via hole connecting the phase shifting layer to the fr4 biasing line layer. the via hole goes through a small aperture realized on another fr4 thin layer which realizes the metal bottom of the cavity on one side and the rf block on the other side (see figs. 10(a),(b)). in order to minimize the mutual coupling between adjacent elements in the lower spacer a circular metallic cavity is realized by means of via holes.

a. principle of operation of the elementary cell

the printed circular patch on the topside of the cell is coupled to both the vnd h polarized fields. the field is then coupled to the phase shifting layer on the lower substrate. in fig. 10 the phase shifting layer is depicted in detail showing its top and bottom faces. the top face consists of a circular slot line ring, opportunely dimensioned. the ring is connected to the phase shifting circuit made up by three slot lines arranged in t configuration, two pin diodes (beam lead skyworks dsg 9500) in anti parallel configuration are placed on two of these lines to obtain a single pole double throw (spdt) switch. the wideband operation of the elementary cell 5

fig. 10. exploded view of the proposed elementary cell: a) top view, b) bottom view. top c) and bottom view d) of the phase shifting layer. magnified view of the pin diode switch (e). the dielectric constants, loss tangent and thickness of the materials used are: arlon ad450 (εr=4.5, tanδ=0.0035, h=0.508mm), fr4 (εr=4.4, tanδ=0.02, h=2mm and h=256mm).

(10.7 ghz 14.5 ghz) is obtained exploiting the principle of operations of multi resonator elementary cells already described in . this kind of structures are filters with radiating ports obtained by integrating two antennas or, as in this case, a dual mode radiating element with a resonant structure in between. as in classical filter design the desired operational bandwidth of the elementary cell can be obtained by dimensioning the resonator lengths and the couplings between resonators. the proposed cell, in fact, can be considered as a 5 pole filtering structure (fig. 11). the 1st and the 5th resonators correspond to the two orthogonal resonating modes of the patch, coupled to the two orthogonal resonating modes of the slot line ring (the 2nd and the 4th resonators). the

circular patch slot line ring slot line resonator

fig. 11. equivalent circuit of the proposed elementary cell.

table i circuit model of the lumped components

on state pin diode state

fig. 12. rlc circuit models of the pin diode in onnd off state.

two modes of the ring are coupled to one of two possible active slot line paths (3rd resonator) enclosed in the ring. by alternatively activating the pin diodes, one of the two possible paths enclosed in the ring is selected. correspondingly the reflected field is subjected to +90° or 90° geometrical rotation. in other words as shown in , the reflected field is orthogonally polarized with respect to the incident field and the two states produce 180° of phase shift independently of the frequency.

b. unit cell control and model of the pin diode

given the high number of devices required for the antenna assembly (10500 diodes), the diode selection is the result of a trade off between cost and performance. in this phase of development of a proof of concept project, the design of the elementary cell has been carried out adopting a low cost packaged pin diode (skyworks dsg 9500). however, this device inevitably affects the efficiency of the antenna due to the high series resistance (rs) and the parasitic effects of the package. a future development of the design could easily overcome this issue by using bare die (or unpackaged) pin diodes. this solution makes possible to increase the overall performance of the antenna and drastically reduce (up to a factor of ten) the unitary cost for the reconfigurable devices in a high volume production.

in the proposed unit cell the diodes are mounted in anti 6

b) fig. 13. measured cond cross polarization reflection coefficients of the elementary cell compared to the measurements of a reference metal plate (a) and with simulations (b). front (c) and back (d) view of the measured array. pictures of elementary cells manufactured for the tests (e). parallel configuration, thus, depending on their state, they

fig. 14. measured phase shift between the cross polarization reflection coefficients of the cell in both the possible states.

ideally act as a short circuit or as an "rf transparent" component on the slot line. the anti parallel configuration allows the diodes to be alternatively activated with a single control signal with two opposite voltage values v. in this way they are able to activate only one of the two possible paths on the slot line.

according to fig. 10, in order to activate the pin diodes, is necessary to provide the ground reference voltage to the quarter circle pads enclosed in the slot line ring and the control voltage to the half circle pad. the bottom metal layer of ad450 has been designed in such a way as to provide to each pad the ground reference by using via holes and thin microstrip lines. as already described, the biasing voltage is provided with a via hole that connects the half circle pad to an external reference coming from the backside of the elementary cell. an rf block isolates from the high frequency signal the c) d)

lower printed layer.

the structure of the elementary cell has been optimized in order to minimize the co polarization reflection coefficients in the operative bandwidth. the optimization has been carried out including in the cell the characterized model of the piniode. the circuit model of the diode has been derived experimentally by performing calibrated measurements. the rlc circuit models of the pin diode in onnd off state are detailed in table i and fig. 12. the on state model of the pin diode is obtained by forward biasing it with a current of 72ma and a voltage of +5v.

the electromagnetic simulations of the unit cell have been carried out using ansoft hfss with floquet modes and periodic boundary conditions in combination with integrated lumped elements whose values are fixed in accordance with the extracted circuit model of the diode. the simulated cond cross polarization reflection coefficients are represented in fig. 13(b), superimposed to the measurements. since the elementary cell is designed in order to rotate the incident field polarization, to characterize its performance, the reflection coefficients relevant to the crossnd co polarizations are used. simulated loss of the elementary cell shows an average value of 4db. the hfss model of the cell has been used in order to evaluate the effects on the loss of the device adopted. the analysis highlights that an high performance pin diode with a series resistance in the on state of rs=3ω, instead of the currently adopted with rs=8 ω, would reduce the loss of 1.8db. fig. 14 depicts the simulated phase of cross polarization reflection coefficients in both configurations: it is worth to observe that the proposed architecture allows to obtain a 7

d) fig. 15. antenna in transportation configuration (a). stabilizing feet of the antenna (b). stowed configuration of the antenna components (c). deployed configuration from different points of view (d), (e) and (f). relative phase shift with an average level of 181.5° and a maximum deviation of 2°.

c) fig. 16 control board of the antenna during the assembly: the logical subdivision in triangle of the main reflectarray can be observed (a). control c)

circuitry general architecture (b). triangular control circuit board.

c. unit cell prototyping and measurement

this sub section presents the performance analysis of the optimized cell regarding to reconfigurability, operative bandwidth, losses and cross polarization levels. in order to validate the simulation results, the reconfigurable cell has been experimentally characterized using a free space reflection setup. in this measurement setup the antenna under test (aut) is a planar array of elementary cells all in the same configuration. the aut is illuminated by a feeding horn and the signal reflected is collected by a second horn. both horns are pointed toward the centre of the aut with the same tilt angle with respect to its normal direction. in order to analyze both the cond cross polarization reflection coefficients, the receiving horn can be twisted around the axis of the radiating direction by 0° or 90°.

compared to the waveguide simulator measurement setup (wgs), this solution requires the manufacturing of a larger breadboard prototype, but also provides some advantages. in fact, the response of the cell can be evaluated with an arbitrary selected incidence angle also varying the frequency, while in the wgs for a fixed width of the waveguide, the incidence angle varies depending on the frequency. moreover in a freepace reflection setup the periodicity of the elementary cell is the same one used in the final reflectarray, thus allowing one to directly compare the measured frequency response of the cell with the one full wave simulated in periodic boundary conditions. to perform the measurements a 16 × 16 array prototype with size 160mm × 160mm has been fabricated. the prototype is a full reconfigurable array with integrated piniodes (fig. 13(c) and (d)). in order to provide the same configuration to all the elementary cells, the biasing lines of 8

e) fig. 17. measured radiation pattern of the antenna for different pointing direction in elevation (azimuth is 0°): elevation (a) and azimuth (b) cuts for pointing direction 50°, elevation (c) and azimuth (d) cuts for pointing direction 45° and elevation (e) and azimuth (f) cuts for pointing direction 40°. each cell on the backside of the array are connected to the

before measuring the aut, a metal plate with the same dimensions (160mm × 160mm) is measured. the two free space sections are assumed to be identical, hence by using the measurement results of the metal plate (in this case a copper plate has been used), free space and spill over losses as well as direct coupling between the two horns can be de embedded from the aut measurements. fig. 13(a) reports the measured value of cond cross polarization reflection coefficients of the aut compared reflection coefficients of the copper plate evaluated for an incidence angle of 25°. during the measurements, the diodes are driven with +5v and 72ma of biasing current. a good agreement between simulations and measurements and a level of measured loss with a mean value of 4db can be observed in 10 40 60 15 80 20 80 20

fig. 13(b), the loss cannot be accurately measured for several reasons. first, the measurement setup doesn't allow to dembed the loss of the copper plate used as a reference for the normalization. moreover, during the reference plate can be subjected to some misplacement with respect to the exact position of the aut. these factors, in association with some non idealities of the planarity of the copper plate, can affect the specular direction in which the signal is reflected leading to a variable level of the coolarization reflection coefficients of the copper plate.

v. mechanical design and electronic control of the antenna

in the previous sections the features relevant to the rf 9

e) fig. 18. measured radiation patterns of the antenna compared with the simulated radiation patterns: v polarization at 12.75ghz with pointing direction (a) 50°, (b) 45°, (c) 40°. h polarization at 12.75ghz (d). comparison between the cond cross polarization levels for the configuration with pointing direction elevation=45° and azimuth=0° (e). manufactured prototype during the measurements (f). design of the antenna have been analyzed. in the following a description of the mechanical and electrical solution adopted

for the design of the antenna and the control of the main reflector configuration will be provided.

one of the key objectives of the project is the development of a foldable and portable reflectarray antenna. as already shown, a proper architecture has been therefore proposed to this purpose. the antenna is conceived in such a way as to present a rectangular shape in stowed position and a trapezoidal shape when deployed, obtained by unfolding of three triangular panels ("petals"). the feed is placed in the edge where the forth petal is missing. in stowed position the sub reflector is stored directly above the folded main reflector 140 40 100 160 60 120 20 0 20 10 80 180 15

while the feed is housed below the main reflector.

thanks to these folding properties, the rf part can be compacted and the whole antenna can be enclosed in a box (fig. 15(a)). during the deployment the sub reflector is manually linked to the main reflector using six supporting links. an elevation mechanism allows the main reflector to be manually pointed with an inclination from +26° to 34° with respect to the horizontal position. azimuth rotation is also performed mechanically in a range of 360°. this allows the user to perform a first rough pointing of the antenna, assisted by on board sensors (gps, compass, etc). once the antenna is roughly pointed, can automatically point the satellite direction. the antenna in the electronic beam steering 10

operative configuration is shown in fig. 15(d).

in order to dissipate the heat produced on the electrical equipment integrated in the antenna main reflector, a cooling system has been studied in detail: four fans positioned on the same level of the feeding horn, push a continuous air stream on the lower surface of the antenna board. all the mechanical parts of the antenna have been designed to make it resistant to the stress provided by the wind force. the design has been performed considering a wind speed of 80km/h and considering the antenna in the worst condition in terms of mechanical inclination.

one of the main issues in the design of a wide aperture reconfigurable antenna is the need to control the high number of active elements. in the proposed design this issue is simplified by the use of a 1 bit phase discretization and through the control of the state of each elementary cell with a single control signal. anyway, for the selected size of the antenna is necessary to drive 5250 elementary cells. in order to accomplish this task, the use of a modular approach is necessary: as shown in fig. 16(a) the reflectarray is divided in 14 logic areas shaped as triangular panels. each panel is madep by 375 elementary cells.

all the components of the control logic have to fit in a small triangular area whereas some space need to be empty for mechanical purposes. the solution adopted is based on a multilayer panel control board (pcb), which provides the routing of the biasing line of 375 cells by means of 48 cascaded shift registers.

the 14 pcb modules are programmed and controlled by a 16(b)) equipped with a rs232 interface board (fig. microcontroller which translates an incoming serial data stream in the correct signal sequence and distributes it to the panels (fig. 16(c)). an external high level application is used to drive the microcontroller and hence to provide the desired state to all the elementary cells of the reflectarray.

the antenna, including the rf circuits, the control boards and the supporting mechanics has been manufactured and assembled by elital s.r.l. (l'aquila italy). the prototype has been measured in the anechoic chamber of the testing and certification antenna laboratory (leha) of the upm (madrid spain).

during the measurements, the antenna was controlled by a pc connected through a serial port to the electronic control board of the antenna. the pc synthesizes the correct state for the main reflector first by calculating the ideal phase distribution then by applying the 1 bit quantization.

to verify the beam scanning operation mode, the synthesis algorithm is applied to obtain the main beam pointed to some specific directions in the elevation plane of the antenna.

for each scanning angle, the measurements of the azimuth and elevation cuts of the dual reflectarray antenna for vertical and horizontal polarizations at different frequencies have been carried out. the selected frequencies cover the typical transmit and receive frequency bands of the ku band satellite communications. since in operative conditions, the electronic

fig. 19. radiation pattern of the antenna evaluated for wider scanning angle: (a) elevation is varied from 90° (broadside) up to 30° and azimuth is maintained 0°. (b) elevation is 40° and azimuth is varied from 0° up to 15°.

steering of the main lobe is used to refine the pointing direction of the antenna, the scanning angles have been first observed in a limited range (±5° in azimuth and elevation) with respect to a nominal pointing direction selected (45° elevation, 0° azimuth).

fig. 17 shows the radiation patterns measured varying the frequency and the pointing angle in elevation form 40° to 50° with a step of 5°. the measured patterns refers to the v pol. for the frequency of 11.5ghz to 12.75ghz and to the h pol. for the frequency of 14.25ghz.

the for each configuration the antenna measured at frequency of synthesis (12.75ghz) provides a precise pointing of the main lobe in the desired direction. changing the frequency of analysis, gain variations lower than 2.6db can be observed. measurements highlight that the pointing direction 11

of the antenna is subjected to the effect of frequency squint. considering the worst case (elevation 50° and azimuth 0°), the frequency variation "moves" the main lobe direction with respect to the nominal pointing of ±2°. in fig. 18(e) the levels of cross polarization in case of elevation 45° and azimuth 0° can be observed varying the operative frequency. the crossolarization in the pointing direction is always below 18db (also in the configurations not reported in this paper).

for the validation of the design technique presented, the measured radiation patterns of the antenna are compared with the simulated radiation patterns. the simulated results are obtained by computing the amplitude and the phase of the electric field incident on each cell of the main reflector in transmit and receive bands. the incident field on the maineflector is produced by the designed feeding horn and subeflector whose effects can be predicted combining the simulations of both the elements. in a second step, the appropriate states of all the 1 bit reconfigurable elements are determined to provide a focused beam in a given scan direction. then the radiation pattern of the antenna is computed taking into account the real dispersion of the reconfigurable reflectarray element. the simulated and measured elevation cuts of the radiation pattern at 12.75ghz can be seen in fig. 18 as well as the antenna in the gregorian compact range test chamber.

the measured radiation patterns are similar with respect to the simulated ones except for the gain value. even if the antenna is able to point the main lobe with a very good accuracy, the obtained gain values reveals a low antenna efficiency.

the low efficiency is caused by a number of reasons. first of all the nature of the adopted pin diode: the high series resistance rs of the diode and the parasitic effects of the package provide 4db of loss. moreover this limitation is further enhanced by a second relevant factor: the need to limit the power consumption of the antenna. in fact the aim of the antenna for emergency communications and this constrained the biasing current of the pin diodes from 72ma used during the test of the single element to 20ma. the consequent additive loss provided by this factor is 2.1db. this value has been estimated using an updated model of the diode, experimentally derived from calibrated measurements, in combination with the hfss model of the elementary cell. another reason of low efficiency is the high rate of damaged cells (roughly 35%). this effect produces an additional gain reduction of roughly 2db. the high damage rate is due to the critical procedure of manual soldering of the pin diodes. the effects of the damaged cells are highlighted also by the coolarization radiation pattern in fig. 18(d): broken cells doesn't rotate the incident field, thus the measured level of the undesired polarization radiated is visibly higher with respect to the simulated one.

in order to prove the capability of the antenna to steer the beam in a wide range, measurements with a pointing direction moved in elevation from 30° to 90° (with an azimuth pointing direction of 0°) and in azimuth from 0° to 15° (with an elevation pointing angle of 45°) have been performed. results are plotted in fig. 19(a) and (b) and shows a maximum error in the pointing direction of 1.5°

a dual reflectarray antenna with a compact optics has been proposed in this paper. the antenna is designed to provide electronic beam steering in portable systems for ku band satellite links with automatic pointing capabilities. the antenna configuration comprises a passive sub reflectarray and a main reflectarray with 1 bit electronic control to provide a pencil beam steerable in a wide angular range.

the design of the reconfigurable elementary cell and the reflectarray architecture have been described along with the solution adopted for the deployability and the control of the elementary cells. the measured radiation patterns of the fulleconfigurable manufactured prototype have experimentally validated the principle of operation of the proposed antenna.

the low efficiency of the prototype is the main limitation of the design, and is mainly provided by the adopted lowerformance pin diode. anyway, this issue can be overcome through the use of bare die pin diodes along with the the automatic mounting. this kind of device allows elementary cell performance to avoid the parasitic effects of the chip package thus obtaining in future developments of the project better performance with sensibly reduced costs.

this work has been carried out in the framework of (esa contract n° 22078/08/nl/st),

reskue project supported by european space agency (esa).

han, c.; hsu, s.; chang, k.; huang, j., "a ku/ka dual band reflectarray to emulate a cylindrical reflector for titan cloud precipitation radar and altimeter," antennas and propagation society international symposium, 2007 ieee , vol., no., pp.1445,1448, 9 15 june 2007

pozar, d.m.; targonski, s.d.; pokuls, r., "a shaped beam microstrip patch reflectarray," antennas and propagation, ieee transactions on , vol.47, no.7, pp.1167,1173, jul 1999

using aperture coupled elements," antennas 12

etsi en 301 428 v1.3.1 itu r s.728.1 billy wu, adrian sutinjo, mike e. potter, and michal okoniewski, "on the selection of the number of bits to control a dynamic digital mems reflectarray," ieee antennas and wireless propagation letters, vol. 7, 2008

montori, s.; cacciamani, f.; gatti, r.v.; carrasco, e.; barba, m.; encinar, j.; sorrentino, r., "wideband dual polarization reconfigurable reflectarray at kulementary cell band," antennas and propagation (eucap), 2010 proceedings of the fourth european conference on , vol., no., pp.1,5, 12 16 april 2010 el gannudi, h.; gatti, r.v.; tomassoni, c.; sorrentino, r., "preliminary design of foldable reconfigurable reflectarray for ku band satellite communication," antennas 2010 proceedings of the fourth european conference on , vol., no., pp.1,5, 12 16 april 2010 the laurea simone montori degree in electronic engineering from the university of perugia, perugia, italy in april 2006. in 2006 he joined the department of electronic and information engineering (diei) of the university of perugia (italy) as a research assistant on reconfigurable antenna systems. in february 2012 he received his phd degree at university of perugia under the advice of prof. roberto sorrentino. he is currently working at rf microtech srl as rf and microwave r&d engineer. received

fabrizio cacciamani received the master laurea degree in electronic engineering from the university of perugia, italy, in 2009. in february 2010, he joined the department of electronic and information engineering (diei) of university of perugia (italy) under the advice of prof. roberto sorrentino. for the last two years he has collaborated with rf microtech (spin off of perugia university, italy) in several international research projects concerning rf mems, microwave filter and antenna design.

roberto vincenti gatti the laurea degree summa cum laude from the university of perugia, italy, in 2000, and the ph.d. degree from the same university in 2007. since 2007 he is research assistant at the university of perugia. he has developed an efficient cad tool for the analysis and large electronically scanning design of slotted waveguide antennas (www.swan soft com). from september 2007 to march 2012 he was vice president of rf microtech srl. he is serving as reviewer of numerous technical journals such as ieee trans. microwave theory and techniques (t mtt), electronics letters (iet journals) and international and wireless technologies. since 2009 he is a member of the ieee international microwave symposium technical program review committee. received

journal of microwave

guido arista is the general manager in elital s.r.l. for the technical design, production activities and commercial affairs from negotiation to post delivery phase. his skills and past experience are: electronics and mechanical engineering, printed circuits manufacturing and certification for space use.

roberto sorrentino (m'77 sm'84 f'90) received the doctor degree in electronic engineering from the university of rome "la sapienza," rome, italy, in 1971. in 1974, he became an assistant professor of microwaves with the university of rome "lasapienza." he was an adjunct professor the the university of catania, with 13