a tunable si3n4 integrated true time delay circuit for optically controlled k band radio beamformer in satellite communication

n. m. tessema, z. cao, j. h. c. van zantvoort, k. a. mekonnen, a. dubok, e. tangdiongga, a. b. smolders, and a. m. j. koonen

abstract—in this paper we present the design, realization, and experimental characterization of a photonic integrated true time delay circuit on a cmos compatible si3 n4 platform. the true time delay circuit consists of an optical side band filter for single side band modulation and an optical ring resonator for broadband time delay. two methods of optical delay tuning are investigated: 1) optical wavelength and 2) thermo optic delay tuning. the waveength controlled tuning enables a large delay tuning range and can be done remotely from a distant location. the close to a linear phase measurements can be used for full beam scanning of radio signals with frequencies in the 20 ghz band. the thermal control results in a 5 ghz rf delay bandwidth. a proof of concept 2 × 1 beamforming is demonstrated in the 20 ghz band. the design preented here can be employed to realize multi beams for multi users serviced by multiple satellites.

index terms—beam squint, focal plane array (fpa), free spectral range (fsr), mach zehnder interferometer (mzi), off resonance delay tuning, optical ring resonator (orr), photonic integrated circuit (pic), radio beamforming, wavelength delay tuning.

r adio beamforming is the ultimate solution to satisfy the

increased spatial bandwidth demand of wireless commuication users. beamforming, typically done by coherent comination of signals via multiple antenna elements, increases the power budget of a radio communication link. electronic beamformers using traditional phase shifters have intrinsic narowband characteristics which results in beam squinting and a reduced antenna gain for broadband rf signals. this is due to the constant phase shift applied for all frequency compoents of the signal. wideband electronic beamformers based on

manuscript received january 30, 2016; revised may 13, 2016 and june 17, 2016; accepted june 19, 2016. date of publication june 26, 2016; date of current version september 25, 2016. this work was supported by the dutch science and technology foundation (stw) in the context of freebeam project, and by the european research council (erc fp7) in the context of browse project. n. m. tessema, z. cao, j. h. c. van zantvoort, k. a. mekonnen, e. tangdiongga, and a. m. j. koonen are with the technical university of eindhoven, cobra research institute, electro optics communication group, electrical eng. department, 5600 mb eindhoven, the netherlands (e mail: n.tessema@tue.nl; z.cao@tue.nl; j.h.c.v.zantvoort@tue.nl; k.a. mekonnen@tue.nl; e.tangdiongga@tue.nl; a.m.j.koonen@tue.nl).

a. dubok and a. b. smolders are with the technical university of eindhoven, centre for wireless communication, electro magnetics group, elecrical engineering department, 5600 mb eindhoven, the netherlands (e mail: a.dubok@tue.nl; a.b.smolders@tue.nl). fig. 1. photonic integrated beamformer circuit). satellite home commuication link with fpa antenna system (with

true time delay (ttd) circuits can reduce problems associated with the beam squint; however, their bulky size, high power consumption and limitations at high radio frequencies pose maor implementation problems . optically controlled radio beamforming can provide a solution for the beam squint probem as a result of the enormous bandwidth provided by optical ttd devices. ttd provides a linear phase shift over a large frequency range. however, ttd devices made of bulky optics have limited applications due to their large size and large optical power losses. therefore, the realization of photonic integrated ttd devices is the ultimate solution for wideband beamformng . further advantages of a photonic solution include reduced weight, compact size and immunity to electromagnetic interference .

with the ever increasing demand for high capacity links, satellite home communication is a key enabler technology esecially in remote areas where a passive optical network inrastructure is not present. fig. 1 shows such a satellite home system in which an optically controlled radio beamformer is integrated with the fiber in home network. within a home netork, an optical fiber link can be used to provide wideband seamless connectivity to the devices in each room . a focal plane array (fpa) antenna system operating in the 20 ghz radio frequency (rf) band receives and transmits rf signals to and from a satellite. such an antenna system is comprised of a dish reflector fed by an array of antennas and can be controlled by electronic or optical beamforming. the fpa is mounted in the focal plane of the reflector antenna and serves as a feed (converts the received radio signal to electric current). this configuration tessema et al.: tunable si3 n4 integrated true time delay circuit for optically controlled k band radio

provides a high gain and beam scanning over a limited angular scan range and achieves a better performance than traditional single feed reflector antennas . since an fpa has more array elements than a traditional single feed reflector system, a higher equivalent isotropic radiated power level can be achieved . furthermore, it can be realized at much lower cost than a tradiional phased array antenna. in this configuration, the antenna system can be aligned automatically via beamforming to receive signals from satellites. ttd based on photonic integrated ciruit (pic) technology incorporated with the fpa antenna system can provide this beamforming functionality. the home commuication controller (hcc) sends a control signal from a look up table to tune the ttd pic so that a radio beam can be pointed to a desired target satellite. multiple wavelengths can be emloyed to generate multiple beams simultaneously. this allows satellite home users to receive signals from multiple satellites at the same time. we designed, realized, and characterized ttd pic beamformer intended to operate in such a satellite home system.

research and experimental work toward the implementation of the ttd pic have been recently undertaken. a squint free step wise beam steering pic for indoor communications was demonstrated in an soi platform . it is based on a step wise wavelength tunable ttd with arrayed waveguide grating feedack loop (awg l). a novel wavelength tunable step wise 2d beam steering system architecture for squint free operation is proposed in . for beamforming purposes in satellite commuication however, continuous tunability of a wideband optical delay is important for seamless beam scanning .

previous experimental demonstrations of continuous ttd inolved thermo optic tuning. a thermally tunable si3n4 ttd deice that generates continuous delay for 2d beamforming based on optical ring resonators (orr) has been reported in . the device footprint is reduced by the introduced novel beamformng architecture. the same ttd unit is used to delay signals from a subarray at the increasing cost of one wavelength per subarray (a subarray is a single row of a 2 dimensional antenna array and it can be used to steer a beam in a single dimension). a ttd bandwidth of 8 ghz is achieved by cascading three orrs, which increases the complexity of the device.

reported works on ttd pic beamformers were either solely based on thermo optic continuous delay tuning or solely based on wavelength delay tuning with discrete delay values. in this paper, we present an experimental demonstration involving coninuous delays based on wavelength delay tuning and continuous delays based on thermo optic off resonant delay tuning of the realized integrated ttd circuit.

the realized ttd circuit is a cascade of an optical side band filter (osbf) and an orr for broadband optical delay. the osbf has a free spectral range (fsr) of 0.48 nm and is designed for single side band (ssb) operation. the ssb modulation reaxes the ttd bandwidth requirement of the orr. to the best of our knowledge, so far, it is the most compact of all osbf devices fabricated on a si3n4 platform and has the largest fsr. previous designs of osbf reported in , , and were limited to an fsr value of less than 0.2 nm. this enables our pic beamforming operation in the 20 ghz rf band. in order to enhance the footprint scalability of a ttd device for a large antenna array, two feasible approaches can be folowed. firstly, by increasing the ttd bandwidth per delay unit, it is no longer necessary to cascade delay units, thus the device footprint can be reduced, thereby keeping the device complexity to a minimum. we investigated this method in the off resonant delay tuning technique presented in this paper. secondly, by generating wavelength dependent delays, it is possible to use wavelength division multiplexing (wdm) to generate multile delays per delay unit. this principle can be used to realize beamforming of large sized 2d antenna array, while keeping size and complexity of the ttd considerably low. by injectng n wavelengths into a single delay unit, n delays can be generated simultaneously. thus, the required number of delay units decreases as the inverse of the number of wavelengths n; for instance, n can be chosen to be equal to the number of anenna elements in a subarray. as part of the ttd, wavelength (de)multiplexers need to be incorporated. the limitation of the wdm optical beamforming approach is that a large antenna array needs a large number of lasers. a wdm optical beamorming technique that decreases the number of the required light sources is proposed in . a combination of dispersive and non dispersive delays with discrete components was used to generate multiple delays with a single wavelength, thereby reducing the number of required lasers. implementation of this principle in a pic can lead to a compact wdm beamformer for 2d antenna arrays. furthermore, wdm approach can be exended to generate multiple beams by using a single wavelength per beam. the wavelength delay tuning technique presented in this paper can be employed in these cases. it also provides with a passive and remote beam steering control.

this paper is an extension of our paper given in . the novelty of this paper lies from the fact that the ttd circuit is tailored for k band rf signals and two unique delay tuning methodologies: off resonant delay tuning for broadband delay and wavelength delay tuning for remote and passive beamteering control are investigated and experimentally verified. both delay tuning methods are based on a single orr per delay unit, thus a reduced device complexity and footprint of the ttd is achieved compared to what has been presented in , .

the wavelength delay tuning was demonstrated to provide full scanning of the radio beams with a ttd bandwidth up to 2 ghz. a broadband delay with instantaneous ttd bandwidth of 5 ghz is demonstrated using the off resonant delay tuning. a fine tuning of the broadband delay at the off resonance waveengths is accomplished thermo optically, and enables scanning angles ranging from 28° to 34° for a 19.5 ghz signal. an expermental demonstration on a proof of concept, 2 × 1 beamformer based on the ttd pic for a coherent combination of the beamormer channels is presented. since the fabrication of the fpa is undergoing, the integration of ttd with fpa for beamforming experiments will be included as part of our future work.

the rest of the paper is organized as follows. section ii decribes the basic theoretical principles of optically controlled radio beamforming. section iii describes the design, realizaion, and operational principle of the ttd circuit. section iv describes about the wavelength delay tuning and off resonant schematic of optically controlled radio beamformer system.

delay tuning methods in an orr. experimental setup, characerization results and discussions are given in section v, and conclusions follow in section vi.

this section describes the theoretical principles behind the presented optically controlled radio beamformer. in an optically controlled radio beamformer, an rf signal received from an fpa modulates the light signal as shown in fig. 2. an optically controlled ttd enables beamforming/steering. the tunable laser source emits the electric field e0 at the frequency fc. vm (t) is the modulating signal from the mth antenna element at frequency frf . the output of the mach zehnder modulator for a modulation index m can be written as in (1) for a modulator bias condition when no higher order harmonics are present

after the signal passes through the optical ttd, we obtain the expression of (2), where |h(f )| is the magnitude response of the ttd chip and t represents the delay value at which the ttd is tuned

after photo detection, the recovered electrical signal s(t) can be written as in (3) which is the delayed version of the antenna signal. in (3), γ is the responsivity of the photodetector and β represents the magnitude gain of the optical system

by combining the delayed signal with un delayed reference signal, a simple beamformer can be steered. it is obvious from (3) that by tuning the value of the optical delay t it is possible to scan the desired steering angle θ of the antenna array. the delay and the steering angle are related as t = d sin θ/c, where d is inter element antenna spacing and c is the speed of light.

in addition to the tunability of the ttd value t, the instananeous bandwidth in which t is constant is also important. it avoids the problem of beam squint. it determines how much phase error is introduced by the beamforming system. the phase error is the result of the phase response deviation from linearity. the achievable ttd bandwidth of an integrated device based on an orr is correlated with its fsr; the larger the fsr, the larger the ttd bandwidth. conversely, the round trip delay of the device decreases as fsr increases. the minimum bending fig. 3. schematic diagram of the ttd device (cascade of osbf and orr).

radius required to avoid bending losses limits the fsr. thereore, to relax the ttd bandwidth requirement, single sideband modulation (ssb) is implemented. thus, an osbf is an integral part of the ttd device presented in this paper.

furthermore, the frequency dependent amplitude response |h(f )| of the ttd can result in an undesired amplitude weightng (beam shaping), when two or more beamforming channels are tuned at different wavelengths. the desired beam shaping can be achieved by using controlled amplitude weighting usng optical tunable power couplers, or variable gain electrical amplifiers.

iii. design, realization, and operational principles

the designed ttd beamformer is a cascade of a thermally tunable osbf for a single sideband operation and a delay unit based on a thermally tunable orr. osbf enables ssb opertion, thereby relaxing the ttd bandwidth requirement in the orr. the schematic diagram of the ttd device is shown in fig. 3. it occupies a wafer space of 2 × 11 mm2. the transfer function of ttd beamformer, h is the product of the transfer function of the osbf, ho s b f and the transfer function of the orr, ho r r as given in (4).

the osbf is designed for rf signals in the frequency range from 20 40 ghz. it is based on a second order butterworth filter. it is implemented as a double ring assisted mach zehnder interferometric structure and it is illustrated in fig. 3. it occupies a small footprint of 2 × 6 mm2 due to the compact design of loaded orrs. the mach zehnder interferometer (mzi) arms are made of two 3 db directional couplers, in which connecting waveguides are loaded with orrs (orr1 and orr2). three thermo optic shifters enable re configurability and wavelength tunability of the filter response. the compact orrs loaded in the mzi arms have an fsr of 60 ghz. a compact ring layout with a single fixed coupler was employed which reduced the round trip length of orr1 and orr2 to 5 mm and resulted in a compact osbf with an fsr of 60 ghz. the implementation of the fixed couplers with an asymmetric layout (one parallel waveguide is made straight) further promoted a compact implementation of the osbf. to the best of our knowledge, it is a device with the largest fsr of the filters fabricated in a si3n4 platform. the response of the osbf is written as in (5), where t1 is the round trip of orr1 and t2 is the round trip of orr2, κ1 and κ2 (4) are the corresponding coupling coefficients, α is the amplitude transmission coefficient of the feedback loops of orr1 and orr2

φa , φb , and φc are heater induced phase shifts at heaters a, b, and c respectively.the rejection ratio of the filter is tuned by changing the value of φa . the width of the pass band or the rejection can be varied by detuning orr1 and orr2.the orr delay unit which is shown in fig. 3 is implemented using a tunable mzi structure for tuning coupling coefficent κ3. the transfer function of the orr is given in (6), γ is the correspondng amplitude transmission coefficient, and t3 is the round trip time of orr. it is seen from (6) that the coupling coefficient κ3 of the tunable mzi coupler is tuned by changing the phase of heater e, φe . tuning the coupling coefficent enables tuning of the quality factor and therefore tuning of the group delay prole. the generated optical delay of an orr is given in (7),where ψo r r is the phase response of the orr. the design parameters of the ttd are summarized in table i

the realized beamformer chip under a visible light test is shown in fig. 4. the chip occupies an area of 16 × 16 mm2. in addition to the beamforming ttd, it contains test structures of the orr, and the osbf. it is fabricated in a cmos compatile si3n4 platform incorporating moderate index contrast. the minimum bending radius value of 125 μm used in all structures of the bent waveguides ensures that bending losses are miniized. a double stripe waveguide design, in which the core layer is a sio2 layer sandwiched between two si3n4 layers is used. a detailed description of the fabrication process of a fig. 4. realized chip under visible light connectivity. test showing input output

double stripe si3n4 waveguide is found in . the thermoptic phase shifters are realized by depositing a layer of chromium on top of the optical waveguides. thermal crosstalk between the heaters is avoided by keeping a gap of 250 μm beween any two heating elements. lead wires made of chromium and gold facilitate electrical connections to the heater elements. the pic is provided with spot size converters at input and output ports in which a vertical tapering of the si3n4 layer is made to match with the mode profile of a single mode fiber (smf28). the spot size converters are designed to only couple te polarzed light into the optical chip. the initial operational voltage setting of the ttd is determined by the frequency of the rf signal. accordingly, the pass bandwidth of the ttd is tuned by optimizing the heater voltages of a, b, and c while maintaining rejection ratios of 20 dbs and higher on the lower sideband. resonance wavelength shifting of the orr response is carried out by tuning of the heater voltage d. the delay profile is varied by changing the voltage applied on heater e.

iv. delay tuning methodologies

typical ways of tuning the optical delay are changing the wavelength of the input light or changing the refractive index of the optical waveguide via thermo optic tuning. we propose the wavelength and thermo optic tuning of the continuous optical delay realized in a si3n4 orr. the temperature of the optical waveguides is varied via the resistive electrodes mounted on the top of the waveguides. the electrodes (heaters) convert the applied electrical energy into heat energy. the temperaturerought phase variation tunes the coupling ratio (ϰ3) of the orr, which is a mechanism to thermo optically tune the optical delay. fig. 5 illustrates the theoretical group delay responses along with the calculated quality factors of the orr shown in fig. 3. the simulation is done based on (6) and (7), for the orr design parameters given in table i and coupling values ϰ3 ranging from 0.2 to 0.75. group delay responses corresponding to lower coupling coefficient (high quality factor) exhibit a large peak group delay at the resonance wavelengths which drops to a very flat, small delay values at the off resonance wavelengths. however, responses corresponding to high coupling coefficients (low quality factor) are characterized by bell shaped the delay profile across its fsr in which the gradient of delay is relatively smaller. the quality factor (q) of the orr can be thermoptically tuned by changing the coupling ratio ϰ3 to optimize the ttd bandwidth. fig. 5. theoretical plot of delay response of an orr, with wavelength delay tuing, and off resonance delay tuning, calculated quality factor (q).

the wavelength control of the optical delays employs the wavelength dependent delay profile of the orr as illustrated in a zoomed in picture (top) of fig. 5. the variation of delay per unit wavelength is dependent on the quality factor of the orr. for higher quality factors (lower coupling ratios, κ3 = 0.2), the group delay response is characterized by a very steep peak at the resonance wavelength and while being relatively flat at other wavelengths. this means there is a very large group delay variation in a small confined wavelength range, which limits the maximum achievable ttd bandwidth via wavelength tuning. conversely, by tuning ϰ3 to 0.3, a larger ttd bandwidth can be realized due to smaller gradient of the delay per unit wavelength. by increasing ϰ3 further to 0.6, 0.65, and 0.75, the ttd bandwidth can be increased with less delay variation per unit wavelength. therefore, the desired delay tuning range per wavelength can be optimized via tuning of ϰ3.

b. off resonance thermo optic delay tuning

since the bandwidth delay product for an orr is constant, tuning at small delays results in a large ttd bandwidth. thereore, by tuning at the off resonance wavelengths as illustrated in a zoomed in picture (bottom) of fig. 5, it is possible to maximize the ttd bandwidth per delay unit with a limited delay tuning range. this delay generation mechanism provides a large intantaneous ttd bandwidth per single orr without increasing the design complexity.

in our earlier work, we have presented an experimental demonstration of an off resonance thermal tuning of a single orr for an instantaneous ttd bandwidth of 5 ghz . this delay generation mechanism is well suited for higher frequency rf signals (20 ghz and higher) where delay variation of few tens of picoseconds is enough to provide full beam scanning.

v. experimental set up, results, and discussion

the measurements were done by using the fiber to chip couling set up shown in fig. 6(a). a 16 fiber array unit (fau) with a 127 μm pitch was used for the input and output coupling of the optical chip. dc probes were used to make electrical connecions with contacts pads on the optical chip. the temperature of the optical chip was maintained at 20 °c using a peltier based thermo electric cooler (tec). the end to end optical loss of 11 db was measured across the chip. from voltage current meaurements, the resistance of the heaters is found to be 575 ω, 383 ω, 383 ω, 575 ω, and 575 ω for heater a, b, c, d, and e respectively.

a. phase measurements

for phase measurements on the ttd device, the experimenal setup shown in fig. 6(b) is employed. the output of a vector network analyzer (vna) of a radio signal is optically modulated and transmitted through the ttd. during the measurement the wavelength of the laser is changed or thermo optic tuning of heater e is done to vary the delay of the orr. the detected rf signal is fed back to the vna and phase response meaurements are retrieved. the rf phase response of the optical chip measured from the (vna) is used to characterize the delay. the delays are measured against a minimum delay taken as a reference. two delay tuning methods: wavelength delay tunng, and off resonant delay tuning are investigated. the voltage settings used for wavelength delay tuning (setting 1) and the off resonant delay tuning (setting 2) are given in fig. 6(c). the double side spectrum measured at the input of the ttd and the single sideband spectrum at the output of the ttd are shown in fig. 6(d). ssb modulation is enabled with a rejection ratio of 20 db for a 19.5 ghz signal. the optical spectral responses of the ttd for the given voltage settings are provided in fig. 6(e). it is to be noted that the spectrums have differing pass bandwidth due to different voltage settings.

1) wavelength delay tuning: the wavelength delay tuning involves tuning the heater voltages for the desired filtering funcionality and the orr delay as stated in setting 1. the meaurement is then conducted by progressively varying the light wavelength in steps of 2 pm. the delays are obtained from the slope of the best linear fits of the measured phase responses. the deviation of the phase response from linearity is quantified as the root mean square (rms) phase error and rms delay error. in table ii, the phase slope of the linear fit in deg/ghz, the rms phase error in degrees, the delay in ps, and the rms delay error in ps at each of the measurement wavelengths are given. fig. 7(a) and (b) show the phase measurements: the solid lines are the measurements and the dotted lines represent their best linear fits. first, the phase response measurement with bandidth of 1 ghz as given in fig. 7(a) is done while the waveength was tuned from 1540.512 nm to 1540.526 nm and heater e voltage was tuned at 5 v. the measured delay values ranged from 252 ps to 34 ps. a nearly linear phase response was mea fig. 6. (a) photograph of fiber to chip coupling, (b) experimental setup, (c) heater voltage settings (setting 1 for wavelength tuning, and setting 2 for thermoptic tuning), (d) optical spectrum before the chip and after the chip (ssb modulation), (e) spectrum measurement for wavelength delay tuning (setting 1) and off resonant delay tuning (setting 2).

sured, where the maximum rms delay error is 6.2 ps and the corresponding rms phase error is only 2.24°. the ttd bandidth and its deviation from linearity could be improved by thermo optic tuning of the quality factor as discussed in section ii. to do that, the heater e voltage was tuned to 16 v, and phase measurements for ttd bandwidth of 2 ghz as given in fig. 7(b) was conducted, while wavelength was tuned from 1552.61 nm to 1552.67 nm. the delay values ranged from 131.7 ps to 204.2 ps. a better fit to linearity was achieved in this case, as the maximum rms delay error is only 2.3 ps. it is to be noted that the delay variation in this case is smaller because of smaller wavelength delay slope. the measured delays allow more than 2 π rad phase shift for rf frequencies in the 20 ghz band. this enables beam scanning for any desired direction of a taret satellite. due to the periodic response of the orr, each of the tuned delays can be generated after one fsr (0.21 nm).

2) off resonance thermo optic delay tuning: the waveength is tuned at the off resonance wavelength where the delay is flat and the tuning is done by progressively changing the voltage for heater e in steps of 0.2 v. the vna is swept from 17 22 ghz. fig. 7(c) shows the phase response measurements obtained when voltage values applied on heater e was varied from 12 to 16 v. it can be seen that the large degree of flatness at the off resonance band resulted in a linear phase response. acordingly, the measured delay values ranged from 31.1 57.7 ps. the fine delay tuning ranges obtained using this technique were used to calculate the beam scanning range at 19.5 ghz for a 2 × 1 beamformer, while taking the delay at 13.8 v as a reference. it is possible to realize steering angle in the range [ 28° to 34°]. the calculation was done using the relation θ = sin−1[cδt/d ], where c is the speed of light, δt is the delay difference between the two channels. the delay for the reference channel was set at 43.3 ps, while the measured delay values were used for the delayed channel. the half wavelength antenna spacing d of 0.77 cm was used since it corresponds with the largest delay needed to realize the given steering angles. this delay tuning method can be employed for bandwidth intensive applications. a proof of concept 2 × 1 beamformer made up of un delayed path passing through a fiber (ch1) and a delayed path (ch2) passing the ttd circuit is shown in fig. 8(a). an optical phase difference exists between channels due to different signal paths of the two channels after the 3 db coupler. the tunable ttd is tuned to compensate the phase difference between the two channels for coherent combination. the two channels are put into separate pds and are electrically combined with rf cominer. the input powers into the two pds are balanced using variable optical attenuators (voa) for equivalent detected rf power. measurements of the rf power for the ch1, ch2 and the combined channel ch1 + ch2 is done while the local oscillator fig. 7. phase response measurements (a) wavelength delay tuning: 1 ghz bandwidth (b) wavelength delay tuning: 2 ghz bandwidth (c) off resonant delay tuning: 5 ghz bandwidth.

frequency is varied from 17.5 22.5 ghz. it can be seen that from fig. 8(b) that a 6 db increase in the rf power is achieved because of coherent combination the two channels. the roll off in the received power measurements is the result of the fact that the pds have a 3 db bandwidth at 20 ghz. this proof ofoncept beamformer demonstrates the performance of the ttd for rf signals in the 20 ghz band.

we have presented the design, realization, and experimental demonstration of an on chip ttd for radio satellite beamformng. the compact design of the ttd allows an rf beamforming in the 20 ghz frequency band. a proof of concept 2 × 1 beamormer based on a ttd pic is demonstrated in the 20 ghz band. the device design is useful in satellite home systems with radio beamforming. fig. 8. (a) experimental setup for coherent combination of a 2 by 1 beamormer (b) receive power of undelayed path: ch1 , delayed path: ch2 , combined channel: ch1 + ch2 .

measurement results indicate that the wavelength delay tunng method generates more than 2π rad of phase shift for rf signals in the 20 ghz band within a 2 ghz ttd bandwith, enabling beam pointing of the rf signals to any desired anle. the generation of wavelength dependent delays can be employed to demonstrate multi beamforming by using a single wavelength per beam. utilizing n wavelengths results in n siultaneous beams, hence multiple satellite links can be formed at once. furthermore, remote control of the beamformer from a distant location is enabled via a wavelength delay tuning. using thermo optic delay tuning, a broadband delay for an instantaeous ttd bandwidth of 5 ghz is demonstrated. the measured delays enable steering ranges from 28° to 34° for rf signals at 19.5 ghz. in real applications, off resonant delay tuning can be chosen for targets requiring fine tuning of delay such as satellites in geostationary orbits. alternatively, wavelength delay tuning can be used to provide delay values with larger variation, and the necessary delay fine tuning can be accomplished by tuning wavelength or the coupling value.

the authors would like to acknowledge the technical support

from phoenix software and satrax b.v.

j. capmany and d. novak, "microwave photonics combines two worlds,"

z. cao, f. li, h.p.a van den boom, e. tangdiongga, and a. m. j koonen, "optical true time delay microwave beam steering with 1 gbps wireless transmission for in building networks," in proc. eur. conf. optical comun., 2013, pp. 1 3.

z. cao et al., "an integrated step wise optical tunable true time delay system for the microwave beam steering towards in home devices," in proc. opto electron. commun. conf., 2014, pp. 864 866.

a. m. j. koonen and z. cao, "optically controlled 2d radio beam steering system," in proc. int. topical meeting microw. photon. 9th asia pacific microw. photon. conf., 2014, pp. 389 391.