a wideband high gain high efficiency hybrid integrated plate array antenna for v band inter satellite links

jie wu, student member, ieee, yu jian cheng, senior member, ieee, and yong fan, member, ieee

abstract—a wideband high gain high efficiency hybrid interated plate array antenna for inter satellite links is presented in this paper. this antenna consists of microstrip patches, substrate integrated waveguide (siw) and waveguide power dividers. a novel feeding structure is proposed to excite the microstrip sub array with a wideband characteristic. the radiation efficiency of siw arrays with different sizes is compared by experiment. the hybrid siw waveguide feeding topology is optimized to realize high efficiency, low cost and compact configuration at the same time. the array antenna is fabricated through standard multi layer pcb process and milling technology. measured results demonstrate about 14.6% of reflection coefficient bandwidth db) in the frequency band of 57 66 ghz. the gain ( fluctuates less than 3 db within the same band. the 1 db gain bandwidth is 8.1% within the frequency band of 59 64 ghz. the maximum gain is 39.2 dbi at 59 ghz with the efficiency of 41%.

index terms—high gain antenna, hybrid integrated plate array

antenna, inter satellite communication, wideband plate antenna.

i nter satellite links (isls) exchange messages be

tween satellites. they can be classified into two types acording to the satellite orbits. one type is linking with satelites in the same orbit plane, such as communication between satellites in low earth orbit (leo) . the other type is linking with satellites in different orbits, such as communication beween geostationary orbit (geo) satellites and low earth orbit satellites . isls can be realized by optical systems or microwave systems . although the microwave system is proposed earlier than the optical system for isls, the latter goes more smoothly. with the development of semi conductor techology, the microwave system will play a more significant role in isls applications.

the decrease in payload is very precious to the satellite. to reduce the size and weight of the satellite antenna, different soutions have been tried. there are at least two candidates as the

manuscript received may 21, 2014; revised october 17, 2014; accepted deember 07, 2014. date of publication december 18, 2014; date of current verion april 03, 2015. this work was supported in part by the foundation for the author of national excellent doctoral dissertation of china under grant number 201338, and in part by the program for new century excellent talents in universityunder grant ncet 13 0089.

the authors are with the ehf key laboratory of fundamental science, school of electronic engineering, university of electronic science and techology of china, chengdu 611731, china (e mail: chengyujian@uestc.edu.cn). color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online solving methods. one is using high frequency antennas to relize the high directivity with smaller dimensions. the other is using wideband antennas to realize the frequency diversity. as an example, v band has multi gigahertz bandwidth and gets more attention . it is an ideal candidate for inter satelite communication because the propagation path loss is much lower due to the lack of oxygen environment. at this frequency band, wideband antennas have large information capacity.

actually, wideband antenna is a hot topic in the study of modern satellite communications. different kinds of wideband antennas have been designed. traditional wideband antennas contain parabolic antennas , log periodic antennas, tape slot antennas, etc. the parabolic antenna is not a good candidate for the miniaturized inter satellite communication application conidering its volume. the longitudinal length of a parabolic anenna is much longer than that of a plate array antenna. weight is another problem for the parabolic antenna. the parabolic anenna consists of one or two reflectors, a feed and several feed supporting rods. the total volume is larger than that of plate array antenna. thus, the parabolic antenna is apparently heavier with the same materials. besides, the parabolic antenna needs additional fixtures to assemble the transceiver. these fixtures contribute to the large bulk and weight as well. there exists a similar problem for the log periodic antenna and other end fire travelling wave antennas. microstrip antennas , have compact configuration and light weight, but their operating band is narrow. the relative bandwidth of 5% could not satisfy the isls requirement. another critical problem is the high loss at millimeter frequency. parallel plate slot antennas , have the same defects. the substrate integrated waveguide (siw) can solve the above problems to some extent. it has the similar enclosed structure with the waveguide. thus, it has a relatively high efficiency in the small array. however, the inertion loss is a great problem when the siw array dimension becomes large . it is found that the antenna's efficiency dereases a lot when the array scale increases to 32 32 elements. the waveguide slot antennas proposed in , have good performances. they are fabricated by a complex and uncommon process, i.e., diffusion bonding of laminated thin copper plates. very few inter satellite antennas can be found in the pubished papers. the proposed antenna in is a planar array with 16 elements working at s band. due to the relatively low working band, the antenna' size is large and its bandwidth is narrow. a method to design the shaped reflector used in the phased array antennas for inter satellite application is described in . the authors present a ka band antenna and a v band deign. another v band high efficiency shaped cassegrain beam waveguide antenna for inter satellite links is shown in . the performance is really good. however, the size is so huge.

in this paper, a high gain plate antenna working at v band is proposed to replace the bulky parabolic antenna. thus, both wide bandwidth and high efficiency are needed. a large number of elements should be used. we find the siw array antenna can keep a high level of efficiency when the size is no larger than 16 16 elements. to reduce the loss of the feeder line in a larger array application, the siw power divider is replaced by a hybrid siw waveguide power divider. we may get a better result to carry out the replacement at a smaller array scale, such as 8 8, but it is not realistic because of the limited space to arrange the waveguide structure.

32 hybrid integrated plate array antenna as shown in fig. 1 is proposed firstly. in order to meet the requirements of high gain, high efficiency, compact configuration and light weight, three kinds of transmission lines, i.e., microstrip, siw and waveguide, are used. the optimum printed sub array scale is investigated to get a good performance of the final large array. a novel feeding structure from the siw to the microstrip subrray is proposed to expand the bandwidth. a wideband tranition from the siw power divider to the waveguide power diider is designed as well. besides, the parallel feeding topology is adopted to keep the wideband characteristic. after validating the 32 64 elements is prouced and measured. the maximum realized gain is more than 39 dbi.

the paper is organized as follows: section ii discusses the wideband microstrip sub array. section iii presents the design procedure of the hybrid power divider. section iv shows the relationship between array size and efficiency. measured results are provided in section v to validate our design. fig. 2. configuration of the proposed 2 2 sub array.

one slot etched on the top surface of the siw. fig. 2 shows the configuration of the sub array.

the configuration is made of two substrates with a bonding film connecting with each other, which can be easily fabricated through a standard multi layer pcb process. it has six layers from top to bottom, i.e., the top copper layer, the substrate for patches, the bonding film, the middle copper layer, the substrate for siw and the bottom copper layer. radiating patches and microstrip lines are etched on the top copper layer. the thickess of the copper layer is 35 m. the material of the subtrate for patches and siw is the same, i.e., taconic tly 5 ( at 10 ghz) with the thickness of 0.508 mm. a rectangle slot is made in the middle copper layer. metalized holes are fabricated in the substrate below the middle copper layer connecting the middle copper layer and bottom copper layer together. these metalized holes, combined with the middle copper layer and the bottom copper layer, form the siw. the used bonding film is fr 28 0040 50 with the thickness of 0.1 mm. the width of the siw is fixed at 2.4 mm to make sure that only the fundamental mode propagates within the siw.

ansoft hfss is employed here to implement the full wave simulation and optimization. the optimized dimensions of the proposed sub array are: mm, mm,

mm, and mm. the simulated fig. 4. e plane and h plane radiation patterns at different frequencies.

proposed topology. fig. 4 shows the radiation pattern. there is no obvious distortion during the whole band.

generally speaking, the microstrip patch is a narrow band resnant structure. due to the impedance difference among siw, microstrip lines and patches, it is not easy to match them in a wide bandwidth. the microstrip line is not much narrower than the patch at millimeter wave band because of the high operation frequency. the limited space between the adjacent patches is not sufficient for an ideal impedance transfer structure and a wide band 1 4 power divider. this problem restricts the topology in to be wideband. to expand the bandwidth, a coupling slot is used to feed two parallel microstrip lines, which conect two patches respectively. this topology divides power with wideband characteristic naturally. the gap distance beween the two pairs of microstrip lines plays an important role of impedance matching. if we choose the gap distance properly, fig. 5. with different gap distances.

fig. 6. electric field distribution with different thickness of the substrate.

wide bandwidth can be realized. fig. 5 shows the relation of

with the gap distance.

this topology has two different working modes which are deermined by the thickness of the substrate for patches as shown in fig. 6. when the substrate thickness is small, the patches are the dominant radiating elements. the microstrip lines act as the feeder lines. this working mode is the same as the traditional microstrip patch. it is called patch mode. when the substrate thickness increases to , little energy is transmitted to the patches. the microstrip lines working as a pair of equivalent dipoles are the dominant radiating elements. the patches work as impedance matching structure and the middle copper layer acts as a reflector. it is called equivalent dipole mode. when the thickness is in between, these two working modes exist siultaneously. both the patches and the microstrip lines radiate energy. it is called hybrid mode.

the gains of the antennas with different working modes are compared in fig. 7. a higher maximum gain can be reached for the patch mode, but the gain decreases quickly with the change of frequency. the equivalent dipole mode has flatter fluctuation but lower gain. high gain and wide bandwidth are both needed, so the hybrid mode is selected for a trade off. fig. 7. gains of the antennas with different working modes (reflection exluded).

"h" shape power divider is used as the feeding network. it is combined by three t junctions. the configuration of this topology is illustrated in fig. 1. a metalized hole located at the junction of "t" branch is used for matching. due to the the power divider's output ports have symmetry structure, constant amplitude and phase. the 4 4 sub array is based on the microstrip sub array and the "h" shape power divider. electric field distribution is presented in fig. 8.

our design goal is to realize an antenna covering the bandidth of 57 66 ghz. the 4 4 sub array is optimized by hfss to make the center frequency around 61.5 ghz. this type of parallel feeding structure not only miniaturizes the network, but also guarantees the wideband property. the 1 db gain bandidth is from 57 ghz to 66 ghz, which is almost the same with the 2

the compact waveguide power divider is milled on a brass block. it is composed of four parts, i.e., the top half cavity, the bottom half part, the impedance blocks and the connection screws. fig. 9. shows the configuration of the waveguide power divider. its dimension is 88 mm 60 mm 11.9 mm. it has one input port and four output ports. the input port is connected with the down convertor for measurement, and the output ports are used to assemble four 16 16 sub arrays together. fig. 10 fig. 9. configuration of the proposed waveguide power divider.

fig. 10. simulated results of the proposed waveguide power divider.

presents the simulated s parameters of the proposed waveguide component. the insertion loss is less than 0.2 db during the bandwidth of 57 66 ghz. it has nice amplitude balance. the equivalent length of branches ensures constant phase.

c. transition between siw and waveguide fig. 11. sketch of the transition between siw and waveguide.

fig. 12. simulated results of the transition between siw and waveguide.

bandwidth. a vertical transition with wide bandwidth and comact configuration is presented in this paper. fig. 11 shows the sketch of the transition.

the transition is composed of two groups of slots and two posts. the two posts located beneath one group of slots which is perpendicular with the other group. the optimized dimensions of the proposed transition are: mm, mm, mm, mm. the simulated reflection coefficient and insertion loss are shown in fig. 12.

iv. relationship between array scale and efficiency

different sizes of siw sub arrays are fabricated to investigate the relationship between the array scale and efficiency. the opimal hybrid feeding topology can be recognized with the help of such an investigation. fig. 13. gain and efficiency comparisons among different fabricated siw arays.

drastically from 70% to 27.5% as the array size is increased from 16 32. with the expansion of the array size, the length of siw increases much more, leading to the high insertion loss. 16 to 32

besides, there exists a discrepancy between simulated and measured gains, which mainly comes from the inaccurate mateial properties used in the design stage. siw structures with two different lengths are fabricated to estimate the insertion loss of the substrate. the additional length of 102.4 mm produces 3.5 db insertion loss. thus, the siw transmission line loss per unit length is 0.034 db/mm at 60 ghz.

16 sub array is chosen as the watershed. when the array dimension is larger than 16 16, the siw power divider is replaced by the hybrid siw waveguide power divider. it is a trade off between good performance and compact configuration. this is the first time to compare the radiation efficiency of siw arrays with different aperture sizes by experiment. according to the above analysis, the 16

v. experiment and discussion

figs. 14 15 exhibit the simulated and measured results of the 16 siw sub array. the array dimension is 51.2 fabricated 16 mm 51.2 mm 1.1 mm. cst is employed to implement the full wave simulation and optimization. a reflection coefficient below db is achieved within the frequency band from 57 ghz to 66 ghz, except for several small singularities. the realzed gain including the mismatch factor fluctuates less than 1.5 db within the same band.

16 sub arrays are grouped as a 32 32 array. fig. 16 shows the photograph of the fabricated 32 32 array. the total size of the proposed antenna is 120 mm 120 mm 13 mm. in fact, the dimension of the pcb board is only 120 mm 120 mm 1.1 mm. the aperture size is 102.4 mm square, i.e., 3.2 mm 32 elements. the waveguide power divider is milled on a brass block. the thickness of the waveguide is caused by the traditional screw connection. measured results illustrated in four 16 fig. 15. simulated and measured gain of the fabricated 16

fig. 19. measured co polarization and cross polarization patterns of the fabriated 32 32 array at 57 ghz and 66 ghz. mechanical connection between the pcb board and the metal block is designed carefully to avoid the performance deterioraion. first, nylon screws are used to avoid causing radiating elments to short circuit. second, the screw holes are placed at the gap of siw signal channels. besides, asymmetric arrangeent is adopted for screws to ensure the reliability and leave some space for dowels to fix the position of the pcb board and the metal structure. the experiment results validate the reliaility of this type of connection. the hybrid feeding topology has been realized the miniaturization of array design. compared with , the feeding port is completely hidden below the raditing elements. thus, the area of the total array antenna is comletely determined by the radiating aperture.

to realize higher gain, a 1 16 power divider is used to asemble sixteen 16 64 array. fig. 20 16 sub arrays as a 64 shows the photograph of the fabricated 64 64 array. the total size of the proposed antenna is 240 mm 240 mm 13 mm. the aperture size is 204.8 mm square, i.e., 3.2 mm 64 eleents. measured results illustrated in fig. 21 show about 14.6% 64 array.

of reflection coefficient bandwidth ( db) in the freuency band of 57 66 ghz. fig. 22 shows the measured gain and the total radiation efficiency of the fabricated 64 64 array. the 1 db gain band width is 8.1% within the frequency band of 59 64 ghz. the maximum efficiency is 41% at 59 ghz. fig. 23 presents the co polarization patterns and cross polarization paterns at different frequencies.

compared results of size, efficiency and gain between and our design are shown in table i. although the proposed antenna is wideband, high efficiency, planar configuration and compact size, there are still some work to do for further imrovement.

firstly, the proposed antenna in this paper operates with a linear polarization. some satellite applications need circular polarization (cp). a simple solution is rotating four 16 16 sub arrays clockwise or anticlockwise. a waveguide divider with wideband phase shifters can excite such four subrrays with equal amplitude but different phases, i.e., 0 , 90 , 180 and 270 respectivly. to demenstrate the correctness, a small array including four 4 4 sub arrays are designed and investigated as shown in fig. 24. the simulated result in fig. 25 presents an excellent axial ratio within the whole bandwidth.

secondly, the waveguide power divider is milled on a brass block and different parts are connected with screws. the height and weight could and should be reduced. the metalized plastic material and 3d printing technology are two candidates for lightweight waveguide fabrication. this paper shows a wideband high gain high efficiency hyrid integrated plate array antenna operating at v band (57 66 ghz), which employs microstrip line, siw and waveguide to construct the feeding network. different siw sub arrays are fabricated to compare their radiation efficiencies at first. then the optimum feeding topology is determined to realize good performance and compact configuration at the same time. a 32 64 array are fabricated with multiayer pcb process and milling technology. a measured realzed gain of 31.6 34.6 dbi over the entire operation bandwidth is achieved for the 32 32 array. the 1 db gain bandwidth is 8.1% within the frequency band of 59 64 ghz. the maximum total radiation efficiency is 51% at 63 ghz. the maximum realzed gain of the 64 64 array is 39.2 dbi with the total radiation efficiency of 41%. such a hybrid integrated array antenna exibits an excellent candidate for inter satellite communication. 32 array and a 64

a. h. hashim, f. d. mahad, s. m. idrus, and a. s. m. supa'at, "modling and performance study of inter satellite optical wireless commuication system," in proc. icp, 2010, pp. 1 4.

r. lundian, n. nathrath, d. fasold, m. trumper, j. letschnik, and u. walter, "a compact and lightweight inter satellite antenna for s band," in proc. eucap, 2007, pp. 1 6.

k. araki and y. suzuki, "inter satellite link by lightwave," in proc.

j. l. ma and r. m. lu, "the study on rf inter satellite links," in

w. g. cowley and h. e. green, "phased array antennas for inter satel

k. s. rao, k. k. chan, j. w. moffat, and g. a. morin, "a high efciency 60 ghz beam waveguide antenna system for inter satellite links," in proc. ieee antennas and propagation soc. int. symp., 1994, vol. 2, pp. 882 885.

m. nagasaka, s. nakazawa, and s. tanaka, "12/21 ghz dual band feed antenna for satellite broadcasting receiving reflector antenna," in proc. isap, 2012, pp. 790 793.