frederik simoens, member, ieee, bassel f. beidas

song guo , senior member, ieee, and alberto ginesi

issue is devoted to the satellite commuications (satcom) advances so as to gather the most important contributions in this field from academia and indusry. in particular, the importance of this issue is also due to the fact that the last issue appearing on ieee jsac about satcom is dated back to 2004 and therefore many important technology advances have been testified in the meantime, actually revolutionizing the satellite industry. in particular, important innovations have been brought to the design of both ground and space segments, spanning physical layers up to upper layers of the protocol stack.

in the introduction of this second part, we highlight several more technological advancements. one such advancement perains to the efforts by researchers worldwide toward attaining the goal of massive throughput for satellite broadband and broadcasting applications. this is achieved by maximizing the utilization of satellite resources on many levels, including payoad mass efficiency . more specifically, a single transponer is used to relay multiple carriers that employ high order modulation with strong forward error correction codes from dvb s2/dvb s2x. multicarrier nonlinear solutions are thus developed so that the on board high power amplifier is operated near saturation for maximum power efficiency. multicarrier satellite operation is exploited as part of a compreensive design of next generation medium earth orbit (meo) satellite constellation that uses extremely high frequency q/v band or even optical wavelengths.

transmission additionally increases for the spectral efficiency of satcom systems , which receivers are designed to substantially mitigate the controlled distortion over realistic nonlinear satellite channels.

is with the department of electrical, electronic, and information engineering "guglielmo marconi," university of bologna, 40126 bologna, italy (e mail: alessandro.vanelli@unibo.it).

t. de cola is with the institute of communications and navigaion, german aerospace center (dlr), 82234 weßling, germany (e mail: tomaso.decola@dlr.de).

is with newtec, 9100 sint niklaas, belgium (e mail:

is with the advanced development group, hughes,

germantown, md 20876 usa (e mail: bassel.beidas@hughes.com).

s. guo is with the department of computing, the hong kong polytechnic

university, hong kong (e mail: song.guo@polyu.edu.hk).

2201 noordwijk, the netherlands (e mail: alberto.ginesi@esa.int).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available , senior member, ieee,

another advancement intended to address the satellite specrum scarcity problem is via the application of cognitive communications , wherein suitable cognitive techniques are developed to support spectral co existence of satellite and terrestrial networks. moreover, advancement in multiuser precoding , applied at the gateway and optimized for broadand multibeam satellite systems, is fulfilling the aggressive reuse of user link frequency resources. furthermore, comensation for forward link multibeam co channel interference can be effectively achieved at the user terminal side by adopting direct sequence code division multiplexing schemes along with de centralized multiuser detection.

in line with the aforementioned satellite technology advances supported by both academia and industry, the present ieee jsac special issue comprehensively illustrates the main trends and the expected evolutions of the satellite ecosystem, providing an exhaustive summary of the main research activties and the most relevant results achieved in the last five years.

given the large number of accepted papers, the special issue has been subdivided into two parts, the second one being reported in this issue. in the following section, a short overview of each paper being accepted is given, classified according to the main paper scope: precoding and multicast, cognitive satellite communications, networking, and other (including three papers dealing with mission scheduling, leo optical downlink and rainfall estimation, respectively).

ii. summary of accepted papers

a. precoding and multicast

the paper "precoding, scheduling and link adaptation in mobile interactive multibeam satellite systems," by m. a. vasquez et al., deals with the problem of precoding, scheduling and link adaptation in next generation mobile interactive multibeam satellite systems, providing a framework for the performance evaluation when, due to the time varying mobile channel, the precoding subsystem can only rely on a delayed version of the channel state information (csi). the analysis and the numerical simulations in realistic conitions, show that precoding can offer an attractive gain in the system throughput compared to conservative frequency reuse allocations and that, in contrast to general multiuser multiplenput multiple output terrestrial systems, the csi degradation in multibeam mobile applications has a very limited impact for typical fading channel and system configurations. the paper "cooperative multigroup multicast transmission in integrated terrestrial satellite networks," by x. zhu et al., investigates the downlink multigroup multicast transmision in an integrated satellite terrestrial network, in which base stations and the satellite cooperate to provide the mulicast service by using the entire bandwidth. the proposed approach for system optimization takes into account beamorming, quality of service, and operator revenue maximizaion problems. numerical results are reported to evaluate the cooperative multicast schemes as well as the proposed pricing strategy.

the paper "two color scheme for a multi beam satelite return link: interference coordination," by y. couble et al., addresses the return link radio resource allocation challenges, from spectral resource allocation to user scheduling including modulation and coding scheme (modcod) selection. the authors propose a coordinated modcod selection process that alleviates the need for estiating interference and reduces drastically the number of decoding failures. a joint user scheduling and modcod selection problem across all beams is also formulated and solved through a heuristic approach obtaining gains up to 77% with respect to state of the art implementations.

the paper "joint coding and multicast subgrouping over satellite embms networks," by g. araniti et al., considers the problem of multicast satellite transmission for live video streaming (lvs) in land mobile satellite (lms) channels and presents the combined use of multicast resource allocaion schemes and application layer joint coding to enhance the performance of lvs. the performance assessment, caried out by considering a satellite based long term evolution the proposed technique (s lte) forward link, shows that allows high throughput transmissions with satisfactory user quality of experience over different satellite channel propagaion environments.

commuication in cognitive satellite terrestrial networks," by m. min et al., investigates secure communications in a cogitive satellite terrestrial network with a software defined architecture, in the presence of eavesdroppers on the satellite channel, and frequency sharing between the satellite and terrestrial segments. simulation results demonstrate the effeciveness of the proposed beamforming schemes obtained as solutions of an optimization problem.

the paper "multi objective reinforcement learning for cogitive satcom using deep neural network ensembles," by p. v. r. ferreira et al., addresses the challenging problem of software defined radios controlled by artificial intelligence algorithms, by proposing a novel radio resource allocation algorithm leveraging multi objective reinforcement learning and artificial neural network ensembles. simulation results are presented to show the performance of the proposed soluion for different communication mission profiles and error benchmarks. the paper "modeling reliable m2m/iot traffic over ranom access satellite links in non saturated conditions," by m. bacco et al., presents a framework to analyze the stability of random access based satellite channels under the applicaion of iot traffic. a key consideration aspect of the paper is that it considers the use of the coap protocol, which implements an arq strategy and a tfrc like approach to control the sending rate. the paper focuses on the interaction between the random access scheme and the coap protocol, shedding some light on the related design implications.

the paper "analytical framework for effect of link disrupion on bundle protocol in deep space communications," by s. burleigh et al., deals with the usage of the dtn protocol architecture in a deep space environment, putting particular emphasis on the impact of link disruptions on the performance of the bundle protocol. particularly relevant is the theoretical model worked out by the authors to take into consideration the different cases in which link disruption can occur during the transmission of a sequence of bundles.

the paper "elastic reliability of video transfer over lossy satellite links," by x. li et al., proposes a retransmission scheme as an alternative to tcp and udp strategies for video streaming. these latter can cause either excessive delay penalties upon recovery procedure initiation or unreliable data delivery. the design is performed on the basis of prediction schemes applied to track the oscillations of the channel and therefore tune the quality of the video being transmitted.

the paper "channel aware mission scheduling in broadband data relay satellite networks," by d. zhou et al., deals with resource allocation in data relay satellite systems, with particlar attention on power allocation. the formulated problem assumes quite some importance in the context of future constellations systems and it is approached by means of a mixed integer nonlinear program (minlp), which is eventully decomposed into two optimization problems that lose the nonlinearity characteristics and therefore become tractable.

the paper "centralized rainfall estimation using carrier tooise of satellite communication links," by a. gharanjik et al., discusses a real time method for centralized rainfall estimaion using carrier to noise power ratio (c/n) measurements from broadband satellite communication networks. in particuar, a machine learning algorithm based on neural networks is applied to estimate rainfall. the algorithm distinguishes between dry and rain events with high accuracy.

the paper "performance estimation of optical leo downinks," by c. fuchs et al., addresses the use of free space optical downlinks to provide users with high data rates, by anayzing the network design implications in terms of number of ground stations and related geographical location. the paper focuses in particular on the feasibility of the full free space optical networking concept against its well known rf based counterpart, by taking advantage of a large cloud set database to properly dimension links and hence carry out proper dimenioning of the system. we would like to thank all the authors who submitted their valuable contributions to this special issue. they provided both the reviewers and the editors with a full picture of the most appealing advances in satellite communications, with particular emphasis on the new technologies that are expected to play a pivotal role in the next decade. we like also to thank the reviewers who provided thorough and timely reviews, hence contributing to the success of this special issue. finally special thanks go to prof. muriel medard, ieee jsac editor in chief, and laurel greenidge, executive editor, for their support in the preparation of this special issue and the continuous assistance in the various phases of the special issue review and paper acceptance.

b. f. beidas, r. i. seshadri, m. eroz, and l. n. lee, "faster thanyquist signaling and optimized signal constellation for high spectral efficiency communications in nonlinear satellite systems," in proc. ieee milcom conf., oct. 2014, pp. 818 823.

s. k. sharma et al. "satellite cognitive communications: interference modeling and techniques selection," in proc. 6th asms, 12th spsc, baiona, spain, sep. 2012, pp. 111 118.

alessandro vanelli coralli (s'93 m'97 sm'07) received the dr.ing. degree in electronics engineerng and the ph.d. degree in electronics and comuter science from the university of bologna, italy, in 1991 and 1996, respectively. in 1996, he joined the university of bologna, where he is currently an associate professor with the department of electrical, electronic, and information engineering (guglielmo marconi) and also the chair of the ph.d. board, electronics, telecommunications and inforation technologies. from 2003 to 2005, he was a visiting scientist with qualcomm inc., san diego, ca, usa. he participates in national and international research projects on wireless and satellite communication systems. he has been a project coordinator and scientific responsible for several european space agency and european commission funded projects. his research interests include wireless communications, digital transmission techniques, and digital signal processing. he was a co recipient of several best paper awards. he has served as the general chairman and the technical chairman for several scientific conferences. he has been an appointed member of the editorial board of the international journal of satellite communications and networking (wiley interscience) and has been a guest co editor for several special issues of the international scientific journals. tomaso de cola was born in manosque, france, in 1977. he received the laurea degree (hons.) in telecommunication engineering, the qualification degree as a professional engineer, and the ph.d. degree in electronic and computer engineering, robotics and telecommunications from the univerity of genoa, italy, in 2001, 2002, and 2010, respecively. from 2002 to 2007, he was with the italian consortium of telecommunications, university of genoa research unit, as a scientist researcher. since 2008, he has been with the german aerospace center (dlr), where he was involved in different european projects focusing on different aspects of dvb standards, ccsds protocols, and test bed design. since 2015, he has been the deputy area director of the space internetworking services area with ccsds, where he is taking part at the ccsds engineering steering group. he has co authored over 70 papers, including international conferences and journals.

dr. de cola is a member of the ieee communications society, where he is serving as the chair of the satellite and space communications technical committee. he has served on the technical program committee at several ieee international conferences and involved in guest editorial initiatives for the ieee jsac, the ieee network, and the ieee wireless communication magazine.

frederik simoens received the b.s. and m.s. degrees in electrical engineering from ghent uniersity, belgium, and the ph.d. degree in wireless communications from the telecommunications and information processing department, ghent univerity, in 2003. from 2003 to 2008, he was with the telecommunications and information processing department, ghent university. since 2008, he has been with newtec, where he is currently the cto, specializing in designing, developing and manufacuring equipment, and technologies for satellite comunications. he has co authored several patents and over 50 publications in international peer reviewed journals and conference proceedings. his research interests include satellite communications, wireless mobile communications, and multi antenna communication systems. he is contributing to several standardization activities and is a member of the dvb steering board. he is also a member of the executive committee of the ieee benelux com/vt chapter.

bassel f. beidas received the m.s. degree (hons.) in electrical engineering from the california institute of technology, pasadena, ca, usa, and the ph.d. degree from the university of southern california, los angeles, ca, usa.

he was a principal engineer with corvis corpoation, columbia, md, usa, where he developed innovative signal processing algorithms for 40 gb/s ultra long haul optical communications. he is curently an advisory engineer with the advanced development group, hughes, germantown, md, usa. he is responsible for research and development in advanced transission technologies, which have been successfully incorporated into several premier product lines in cellular and satellite communications. his research interests include signal classification, interference cancellation, adaptive signal processing, synchronization, and nonlinear systems. he holds over 25 u.s. patents on digital communications techniques and has several patents pending. dr. beidas is a member of the phi kappa phi, the eta kappa nu, and the tau beta pi, and his biography appears in the national dean's list. he was a recipient of the prestigious fred w. ellersick milcom 2014 award for the best paper in the unclassified technical program. in addition, he was a recipient of numerous awards from hughes, including the 1997 outstanding achievement award, the 1999 special award for exceptional contributions to third generation wireless technology, the 2008 engineering excellence award for significant contributions to advanced technology development, and the 2012 certificate of achievement for excellence in the area of system transmission and satellite design.