abstract— this article presents an efficient analysis method for a novel continuous transverse stub (cts) antenna. as opposed to state of the art cts antenna designs, the proposed architecture achieves circular polarization using a single cts array and without any polarization converter. the structure consists of long radiating slots/stubs fed by over moded parallel plate waveguides. more precisely, the transverse electromagnetic (tem) mode and the first transverse electric (te1) mode of the feeding waveguides are used to generate a circularly polarized field. the array is anayzed using a spectral mode matching method. first, the active reflection coefficient of the infinite array is derived in closed form. a windowing approach is then adopted to compute the radiation patterns of finite size arrays. numerical results obtained with this method are in excellent agreement with full wave simulations, carried out with a commercial software. the performance of this class of cts antennas has been investigated using the developed model. it is theoretically demonstrated that the proposed array can be designed to attain an axial ratio (ar) lower than 3 db over a 52.9% relative bandwidth at broadside. furthermore, the active input reflection coefficient is lower than −10 db over a 40.8% relative bandwidth, when the array steers its main beam ◦ at θ0 = 45 . this solution is an attractive candidate for next generation satellite communication terminals.

continuous transverse stub (cts) array, oversized parallel plate waveguides (ppws).

t he growth of satellite communication (satcom) applica

tions in k a band has boosted the development of novel antenna solutions with wideband performance, wide angle scanning capabilities, and low form factor . continuous transverse stub (cts) arrays have received particular attention

manuscript received december 11, 2018; revised december 18, 2019; accepted january 24, 2020. date of publication february 13, 2020; date of current version june 2, 2020. this work was supported in part by the direction générale de l'armement and in part by the brittany region, france. (corresponding author: michele del mastro.)

michele del mastro, david gonzález ovejero, ronan sauleau, and mauro ettorre are with univ. rennes, cnrs, institut d'électronique et de télécomunication de rennes (ietr) umr 6164, f 35000 rennes, france (e mail: michele.delmastro@univ rennes1.fr).

francesco foglia manzillo is with cea leti, systems department, minatec campus, 38054 grenoble, france, and also with université grenole alpes, 38400 saint martin d'héres, france.

philippe pouliguen is with the strategy directorate, direction générale

patrick potier is with the information superiority, direction générale

color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available from the community due to their low profile and wideband performance . they consist of arrays of stubs or open ended parallel plate waveguides (ppws), which radiate in free space and may be fed either in series or in parallel. a series fed cts array comprises stubs, finite in height, placed on the upper plate of a ppw. the beam is spatially steered by varying the angle of incidence of the wave launched into the feeding ppw. on the other hand, standard parallel fed cts arrays , adopt long slots in a metallic plane fed by a corporate network of mono modal ppws, supporting the transverse electromagnetic (tem) mode. such network typically excites with the same amplitude and phase of each slot. the parallel fed architecture exhibits very wideband capabilities owing to the mutual coupling of the slots .

however, the main drawback of cts arrays is that, due they are inherently linearly to their radiation mechanism, polarized. circular polarization (cp) has become an essential feature for satcom applications for enhancing the robustness of the satellite communication links . existing solutions to achieve cp typically rely on add on linear to circular (lp to cp) converters, placed in proximity of the radiating slots , . nevertheless, the use of lp to cp converters impacts on the overall size and thickness of the antenna system and, at the same time, introduces additional losses.

a novel concept is here proposed for cts arrays. the main underlying idea is based on the bi modal operation of the antenna. over moded ppws are employed to feed the radiating elements. in particular, both the slots and ppws should support the fundamental tem and the first transverse electric (te1) modes. the transverse electric fields of these two modes are orthogonally polarized and therefore, if properly excited, are able to radiate a cp field. this novel cts architecture relies on a single radiating aperture, rather than on two arrays geometrically organized in an egg crate configuration, as recently proposed in . indeed, the radiating aperture in consists of orthogonally oriented long slots, series fed by a corporate network of mono modal ppws. thus, the radition mechanism of the cts antenna that we propose may provide cp fields resorting to a single aperture, which supports two orthogonally polarized modes.

to explore the tool potential of the structure described above. the proposed analysis method is based on a spectral mode matching techique (mmt). this numerical tool builds on the work in , extending it to over moded cts arrays. in particular, an efficient numerical is crucial the model provides a closed form expression for the active impedance of an infinite array excited by the te1 mode. the active impedance under tem mode operation is also accurately predicted for slots and ppws supporting the two selected modes, which also constitutes a further new conribution with respect the radiation patterns of finite size arrays are derived using a windowing approach. design guidelines are also discussed for achieving a wideband impedance matching and low axial ratio (ar). several examples are presented to provide the reader with an useful deepening for different design goals arising in practical applications. the insight provided by the proposed analysis is of considerable importance on the study of the antenna's potentialities and limitations. the versatility of the tool to analyze the array under different and precisely controlled excitations (single mode, multimode) is fundamental to perorm fast and accurate parametric studies. the impact of the array parameters on the antenna's matching and radiation performance are exhaustively displayed and discussed, thus easing the design of a circularly polarized satcom terminal antenna.

this article is organized as follows. in section ii, the active impedance of the radiating slots is derived for an infinite circularly polarized cts array under both tem and te1 mode operation. in section iii, numerical results are validated by comparison with full wave simulations. in section iv, radiation properties and ar performance for a finite size array are derived. in section v, design guidelines are outlined. furthermore, section vi shows a representative example of a possible design in k a band. finally, section vii concludes this article.

fig. 1 shows the geometry of the problem under considration. an infinite array of slots on a ground plane is fed by over moded ppws. the width of the slots is a and they are infinitely extended along the y axis. in order to guarantee a bi modal behavior of the ppws, we restrict our analysis to values of a between λ/2 and λ, where λ is the operating wavelength in the medium filling the ppws. the inter element spacing along the x axis is d. the ppws are filled with a material of permittivity (cid:3)r1. the modes are considered propagating along the z axis. the metallic parts are considered lossless and, hence, modeled as perfect electric conductor (pec). the slots radiate into a planar multi layered medium. the number of media can be arbitrarily chosen and their height is indicated by hq with q ∈ n+. each medium has permittivity (cid:3)r,q+1, where q ∈ n+.

by virtue of the equivalence theorem, a magnetic field integral equation (mfie) is derived to formulate the electroagnetic problem by enforcing the continuity of the tangential component of the magnetic field on the slots

in (1), hi(x, y, z), hr(x, y, z), and ht(x, y, z) are, respecively, the incident, reflected, and transmitted magnetic field fig. 1. geometry of the problem. only three dielectric slabs are shown for the layered media for the sake of clarity. (a) perspective view. (b) cross sectional view taken along the xz plane.

at the discontinuity z = 0. a simple graphical representation of the fields is shown in fig. 1(b). the two incident fields are given by

when the array is excited by a tem or a te1 mode, respecively. in turn, the expressions for the reflected and transmitted fields are

(x) = 1 for −a/2 < x < a/2 and null elsewhere, where kx0 = k0 sin θ0 cos φ0 with (θ0, φ0) the beam pointing direcion, and mt(x, y, z) is the transverse magnetic distribution on d and its expression can be found in . further m is the transverse dyadic green's function for more, gt the half space over the slots. the latter may be evaluated (5) in the presence of a layered medium using an equivalent transmission line model as in . the extended forms of ppw, hte1 htem ppw, and hppw in (2) (4), respectively, are provided in . it is important to notice that only the tem and te1 mode excitations are considered in (2) and (3) for the incident field even if, since λ/2 < a < λ, the tm1 mode can propagate as well. since possible mutual couplings between tem and tm1 modes may occur along any eventual discontinuities, a possible solution to cut off the tm1 mode relies on feeding the slots with longitudinally corrugated ppws (lcppws) . in the following, we will exclude the tm1 mode to feed the structure.

by replacing (2) or (3) (5) in (1), a mfie is obtained. this equation can be approximately solved by truncating the series to 2m 1 ppw's modes and 2n f + 1 floquet's modes, and applying the galerkin's method to (1). two different linear problems arise for the two selected modes. for each mode, the matrix based form yields

, . . . , , . . . , v t e where vte = [v t e m−1 ] are the scalar mode functions of te and tm modes in v t m m−1 the ppws, respectively. depending on the type of impinging field we consider [i.e., tem (2) or te1 (3)], the known terms i01 and i02 take a different form. the mathematical expression of the admittance matrix in (6) can be found in .

for completeness, we report the main results for the tem

mode given in . the constant term in (6) is given by

= 1/ζ with where v t e m ζ the intrinsic impedance of the medium inside the ppws. by inverting (6), the scalar mode functions v t e m=0,...,m−1 and v t m m=1,...,m−1 can be calculated and the fields on the aperture are expressed in a closed form. the active admittance of the radiating slots can be then derived. the mathematical expression of the normalized active admittance is given by

in (8), ht takes into account the contribution of all higher order modes in the ppws and the mutual coupling among feeding waveguides [see (5)]. in (9) mt, tem considers only the effect of the fundamental mode within the ppws.

the extended form of the normalized active admittance (8) when the array is excited by a te1 mode, the incident fields are expressed by (3). in this case, the known term of the linear system (6) is given by

as for tem mode, by solving (6) the scalar mode functions v t e m=0,...,m−1 and v t m m=1,...,m−1 are found. the electromagnetic field on the plane of the slots is therefore completely deterined. the active admittance can be then expressed as

the complete expression of the active admittance (11) is

given in the appendix.

iii. numerical results

the model presented in section ii allows to compute the active impedance per unit length zact = 1/ ¯yact . the obtained results have been extensively validated by using a commercial full wave simulator (i.e., cst studio suite ). the simulation setup is shown in fig. 2. a waveguide port is used to launch the tem and te1 modes into the radiating slot, respectively. furthermore, floquet's port is considered on the top of the air box, placed above the radiating slot. unit cell boundary conditions are enforced on the lateral faces of the model. the reference plane of the derived active parameters is located over the slot. the main parameters of the structure are set as fmin = f t e1 fmax = 2 fmin , cut −o f f , √ (cid:3)r1). these settings guarantee that only and a = 0.5c/( fmin fig. 2. simulation setup of the cts array unit cell. the structure is periodic along xnd y axes.

the fundamental (i.e., tem) and the first two higher order modes (i.e., te1 and tm1) can propagate into the ppws. furthermore, only one dielectric layer is considered over the slots with an arbitrary height h1 = 0.5c/( fmin (cid:3)r2). finally, the spatial periodicity of the array is d = 1.07a and the length of the slot is dy = λmax /30. note that cts arrays are 1 d periodic structure based on long slots. in this case, such a very small periodicity along the slot is only used to numerically validate the proposed tool and avoid possible artifacts due to periodicity along the slot using . several combinations of (cid:3)r1 and (cid:3)r2 have been considered in order to validate the numerical tool and provide some design guidelines in various scenarios.

the tem case is here considered since the results in were validated only for single mode ppws, i.e., for a < λ/2. the number of floquet's modes required to get a stable convergence is n f = 10, while the number of ppw's modes is m ≥ 5 both for the e plane (i.e., φ = 0◦) and the h plane (i.e., φ = 90◦). the real and the imaginary parts of the normalzed active impedance versus frequency are shown in fig. 3 along the h plane. an excellent agreement is observed between the proposed tool and full wave results. similar results are obtained along the e plane and are not reported for the sake of brevity. finally, it is important to note that the active s parameter corresponding to the case (cid:3)r1 = (cid:3)r2 = 1 is less than −10 db over a 66.6% band along the h plane (i.e., for φ = 90◦) when the array is pointing at θ0 = 30◦.

in this section, we validate the active impedance calculation for the te1 excitation. fig. 4 depicts the real and imaginary parts of the normalized active impedance versus frequency along the plane φ = 0◦. an excellent agreement is observed also in this case between the proposed numerical tool and full wave results. one gets stable convergence for all the cases in fig. 3 considering m ≥ 8 and n f ≥ 10. this method has been validated for several combinations of (cid:3)r1 and (cid:3)r2, showing always an excellent agreement in comparison to full wave results. for the sake of completeness, fig. 5 plots fig. 3. active impedance for tem mode excitation versus frequency along ◦ ◦ the plane at φ = 90 for θ0 = 30 . the parameters used in the simulation are √ a = 0.5c/( fmin (cid:3)r2), and zt e m = ζ . (cid:3)r1), d = 1.07a, h = 0.5c/( fmin (a) real part of the active impedance versus frequency. (b) imaginary part of the active impedance versus frequency. √

fig. 4. active impedance for te1 mode excitation versus frequency along ◦ the plane at φ = 0 . the parameters used in the simulation are a = 0.5c/( fmin (cid:3)r2), and = 1/y t e zt e1 . (a) real part of the active impedance versus frequency. (b) imaginary part of the active impedance versus frequency. for θ0 = 30 √ √

real and imaginary parts of the active impedance, normalized = 1/yt e1 of the te1 mode to the wave impedance z t e1 versus the scan angles along the plane φ = 0◦ at f0 = ( fmin + fmax )/2. fig. 5. active impedance for te1 mode excitation versus scan angles θ0 ◦ at f0 = ( fmin + fmax )/2. the parameters used in the along the plane φ = 0 (cid:3)r2), and (cid:3)r1), d = 1.07a, h = 0.5c/( fmin simulation are a = 0.5c/( fmin . (a) real part of the active impedance versus scan angles θ . zt e1 1 (b) imaginary part of the active impedance versus scan angles θ .

active s parameter also ) along the e plane )/(zact + a z t e1 sact = (zact − a z t e1 (i.e., φ = 90◦) versus frequency [see fig. 6(a)] and scan angles θ0 [see fig. 6(b)]. a stable convergence has been achieved by considering m ≥ 10 ppw's modes and n f = 10 floquet's modes. the results shown in fig. 6 illustrate that a very wideband performance is obtained for the te1 mode in both end h planes. to give an example, for the case (cid:3)r1 = (cid:3)r2 = 1, the active s parameter is less than −10 db over a 48.8% band [refer to fig. 6(a)] along the e plane (i.e., at φ = 90◦), when the array is pointing at θ0 = 30◦. on the other hand, fig. 6(b) demonstrates a ±51.9◦ scanning range.

the computation of the radiation pattern in far field zone has been carried out by considering the embedded element pattern of the array . the goal of this section is to analyze advantages and limitations of the proposed cts array for the generation of cp. it is worth mentioning that no pure cp can be achieved by employing the tem and the te1 modes in the ppws. in fact, as detailed in , the transverse e field profile of the te1 mode presents a cosine like distribution with respect to the x component, whereas the e field profile of the tem mode is uniform all over the slot. this means that only at the center of each radiating slot the tem and te1 modes can have equal amplitude. conversely, the two modes are in quadrature by default . fig. 6. active s parameters for te1 mode excitation versus (a) frequency ◦ f0 = ( fmin + fmax )/2. and (b) scan angles θ0 along the plane φ = 90 the parameters used in the simulation are a = 0.5c/( fmin (cid:3)r1), d = 1.07a, and h = 0.5c/( fmin at

a. embedded element pattern

the far field of the array is asymptotically evaluated . a windowing approach is considered to truncate the current along the y axis direction . please note that this approach accounts for mutual coupling among array cells , .

fig. 7 shows the embedded element pattern obtained by (cid:3)1), dy = c/(30 fmin), setting fmax = 2 fmin , a = 0.5c/( fmin d = 1.07a, and (cid:3)r1 = 1 and considering no dielectric layer covering the slots. the array is steering the beam at broadside at the frequency f0 = ( fmin + fmax )/2. the full wave results were obtained computing the transverse field distribution of the two modes on the plane of the aperture and making them radiate in the upper half space. the simulation setup adopted in the commercial software is shown in fig. 2. fig. 7 shows that there is an excellent agreement between full wave results and our in house tool. √

an important parameter to evaluate the purity of the

cp generation is the ar .

the input power (i.e., pt ot = 1w ) is equally splitted on each mode (i.e., tem and v t e1 and te1). the scalar modal functions v t e m in (7) inc and (10), respectively, are chosen accordingly, yielding this preliminary study considers that

where v t e0 . it is worth noting that the power inc ratio between the two modes can be optimized to improve the polarization purity of the antenna.

the results have been validated by full wave simulations and are shown in fig. 8. the ar is lower than 1.5 db over a 39.5% band [refer to fig. 8(a)] and ±60◦ scanning range [refer to fig. 8(b)] along the plane at φ = 90◦ at the central frequency. table i presents a summary of the performance achieved by the design considered in this example. the paraeters of the array are (cid:3)r1 = (cid:3)r2 = 1, a = 0.5c/( fmin (cid:3)r1), and d = 1.07a. the script bw f stands for the frequency bandwidth of the infinite array under consideration and bwθ for its scanning range at f0 = ( fmin + fmax )/2. this summary relates to the beam steering in the plane φ = 90◦. such plane is the one generally used for scanning in cts arrays for parallel fed architectures since it is devoid of grating lobes.

this section discusses the choice of key design parameters and investigates the maximum achievable performance of the fig. 8. ar versus (a) frequency along the main planes at θ0 = 30 (b) scan angles θ0 at simulation are a = 0.5c/( fmin √

proposed array, in terms of bandwidth, impedance matching, scanning range, and ar. this article relies on extensive parametric analyses performed using the fast in house tool presented and validated. the obtained results confirm the broadband and wide angle scanning capabilities of the proosed circularly polarized cts array.

first, we study the impact of the geometry on the input matching. one can indeed determine the best d/a ratio between the array periodicity and the width of the slots by monitoring the active reflection coefficients for tem and te1 modes, respectively. we take as a representative example a structure comprising air filled ppws that radiate in free space (i.e., (cid:3)r1 = (cid:3)r2 = 1) and we evaluate the performance for diferent scan angles in the planes φ = 0◦ and φ = 90◦. by using the tool presented in section ii, the active s parameters when the array is fed by either a tem or a te1 mode are plotted in fig. 9. let us remind that the width of the slots a of the proposed cts array must be such that λ/2 < a < λ. this fact indicates that the active s parameters may no longer be frequency independent in the plane φ = 90◦, as for the case studied in . in fact, the maps in fig. 9 indicate that the best value of the ratio d/a is strongly dependent on the scanning range and the bandwidth one would like to achieve. the width of the slots a is taken as half the longest wavelength in the considered frequency range.

to give an idea, when the array is steering the beam at broadside, the best matching for the tem mode is obtained by choosing d/a → 1, as shown in fig. 9(a), whereas for te1 mode by value of d/a as large the trend is that fig. 9. maps of the active s parameter as a function of frequency and the ratio d/a for both (a), (c), and (e) tem (broadside radiation, (θ0, φ0) = (cid:4) , and (θ0, φ0) = , respectively) and (b), (d), and (f) te1 30 (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:5) modes (broadside radiation, (θ0, φ0) = , and (θ0, φ0) = 30 , respectively). the air filled ppws radiate in free space. several scan angles ◦ in the planes φ0 = 0

as possible [see fig. 9(b)]. in particular, the active reflection coefficient is smaller than −10 db by choosing d/a such that 1 < d/a ≤ 1.4, in case of tem mode excitation. on the contrary, the best input matching when the array is fed by te1 modes is reached for d/a ≈ 1.92. thus, the stricter constraint is imposed by the tem mode configuration and a good trade off sizing is found choosing d/a ≈ 1.4.

to conclude, let us focus on the φ = 90◦ plane, where no grating lobes occur. as shown in fig. 9(c) and (d), the trend is the same as for broadside radiation. in this case, |sact | < −10 db is given by choosing d/a ≈ 1.1 for tem mode and d/a ≈ 1.96 for te1 mode. this means that the ratio between array period and width of the slots achieving the largest bandwidth operation is, in this case, d/a ≈ 1.1. for sake of completeness, we also report the maps along the plane φ = 0◦ in fig. 9(e) and (f).

the behavior of the ar as a function of freuency and d/a ratio is studied to draw design guidelines for high purity circularly polarized radiation. the slots are still considered as being air filled and radiate in free space (i.e., (cid:3)r1 = (cid:3)r2 = 1). fig. 10(a) reports the parametric fig. 10. maps of the ar as a function of frequency and the ratio d/a. the air filled ppws radiate in free space. (a) broadside array. (b) array steering ◦ the beam at θ0 = 30 along the plane φ0 = 90 .

study when the array is steering the beam at broadside, whereas fig. 10(b) shows the results for pointing at (φ0, θ0) = (90o, 30o). we can first notice that the ar gets worse as the scan angle θ0 is different from zero. moreover, ar decreases when f / fmax → 1, as the cut off frequency of the te1 mode is fixed at the lowest frequency. it is also worth noting that this condition mitigates issues due to the dispersion between the tem and te1 modes within the ppws.

the results above imply that the ar performance improves as the ratio d/a is such that d/a → 1. this trend is intuitive because a smaller array periodicity implies lower sidelobe levels in far field zone. however, as discussed in section v a, low values of d/a penalize the input matching when the array is excited by a te mode, especially at low frequencies. thus, the optimal sizing relies on specific design goals. a practical case study is discussed in section vi.

vi. finite size array design

the goal of this section is to show a representative example of a possible design by using the guidelines provided in section v. the antenna performance is monitored within the frequency range 20 40 ghz. the dual mode cts array conists of four air filled radiating slots that radiate in free space. the length of the slots along y axis is dy = 5λmax ∼ 74.9 mm, whereas their width is a = 0.5c/( fmin) ∼ 7.49 mm. about the choice of the array periodicity d, a trade off occurs between the input matching and ar performance, as detailed in section v b. recalling the arguments in section v a, the best sizing for the input matching is given by 1.1 < d/a < 1.4 while scanning along φ = 90◦. on the contrary, the largest ar bandwidth operation is for d/a → 1. thus, the best choice for the array periodicity is d = 1.1a ∼ 8.20 mm.

the input reflection coefficient of the slots is displayed in fig. 11 as a function of both frequency and scan angles under tem and te1 mode operation, respectively. it is worth noting that the input reflection coefficient is computed in an infinite periodic environment. fig. 11(a) confirms the flat behavior of the active input impedance for tem mode opertion. this result is also valid in a monomodal environment, as detailed in . as shown in fig. 11(b), the te1 mode operation limits the antenna performance since its frequency response worsens at low frequencies due to the location of the fmin = 20 ghz. furut off frequency of the te1 mode at thermore, the input reflection coefficient worsens in scanning for both modes. thus, it follows that the largest bandwidth fig. 11. maps of the input reflection coefficient as a function of frequency and the scan angles θ0. the air filled ppws radiate in free space. (a) tem and (b) te1 mode operation. the array is steering the beam along the plane ◦ φ0 = 90

operation shows up at broadside where the relative bandwidth is about 52.9%. besides, a wide scanning range is observed as well. indeed, the active reflection coefficient |sact | is lower than −10 db in a 40.8% relative bandwidth when the array steers its main beam at θ0 = 45◦ in the plane φ = 90◦ [see fig. 11].

the e field polar components are calculated using a winowing approach as in section iv and are plotted at the central frequency f0 = 30 ghz for different scan angles in fig. 12(a) and (b). the ar is also plotted as a function of the scan angle θ0 in fig. 12(c). from fig. 12(a) and (b), a ∼ 3 db scan loss is observed while scanning at 45◦. such dual mode cts array is then classifiable as a wide scanning antenna . furthermore, it is also clear from fig. 12(a) and (b) that the two modes radiate two far field orthogonal components. this is evident by looking at the endfire radiation: eφ presents a null radiation at the endfire direction since the te1 mode has a cosine like profile over the x axis direction of the slots (i.e., null at the edges); on the contrary, eθ is non null at the endfire direction since the tem mode has an uniform distribution along the radiating slots. moreover, it can be noticed from fig. 12(c) that the scanning range for which a r < 3 db is up to ±76◦ at 30 ghz in the plane φ = 90◦.

besides, the ar is plotted as a function of frequency and scan angle θ0 in fig. 13. by varying the scan angle along the plane φ = 90◦, the ar is computed in the pointing direction of the array. the results show that the ar frequency bandwidth is stable almost all over the entire scanning range of investigation. in other words, the ar does not significantly deteriorate with scan losses. this is clearly visible from fig. 12(a) and (b): the maximum amplitude of the two far field orthogonal components is reduced simultaneously in scanning. thus, as shown in fig. 12(c), the ar is lower than 3 db around the pointing angle of the array. this means that the antenna performance is mainly curtailed by the input matching behavior under te1 mode operation.

to conclude, it is worth noting that the input matching of the antenna might be improved by placing dielectric layers on the top of the slots . as an example, fig. 6(a) shows that placing a dielectric layer of relative permittivity (cid:3)r2 = 2 slightly improves the antenna matching when the slots are fed by the te1 mode. fig. 12. (a) and (b) polar components of the radiation pattern at the frequency f0 = 30 ghz for different scan angles. (c) ar versus scan angle θ0 at the frequency f0 = 30 ghz. the array is steering the beam along the plane ◦ φ0 = 90 .

a. input power optimization

section iv b analyzes the radiation properties of the antenna by considering half of the input power for tem and te1 mode excitation, respectively. in this case, a voltage excitation given by (15), corresponding to a unitary overall input power, was considered for each mode. nevertheless, this may not be the optimum power split between the two feeding modes. indeed, the amplitudes of the impinging modes can be optimized in order to further improve the ar performance of the antenna. the amplitudes of the voltage waves of the input modes are related to their power ratio as follows:

where η0 and z t e are the free space and te1 mode charcteristic impedances, respectively, whereas pt e m and pt e1 are the input power of tem and te1 modes, respectively. by enforcing the amplitude of tem mode v t e m such that the maximum input power is pt ot = pt e m + pt e1 =1 w, /pt e m may be varied to analyze the ar perhe ratio pt e1 formance of the array. this analysis is reported in fig. 14. 1

inc (16) fig. 13. ar as a function of frequency and scan angle θ0. the air filled ppws radiate in free space. the array is steering the beam along the plane ◦ φ0 = 90

fig. 14. maps of the ar as a function of (a) power ratio pt e m /pt e1 and frequency for broadside radiation or (b) scan angle θ0 at the central frequency f0 = 30 ghz. the air filled ppws radiate in free space. the array is steering ◦ the beam along the plane φ0 = 90

in particular, in fig. 14(a) the frequency behavior of the dual mode cts array is studied when the beam is steered at broadside. in fig. 14(b), the ar is plotted versus the scan angle θ0 at the central frequency f0 = 30 ghz. from fig. 14(a), it turns out that the best power split is achieved for /pt e m ∼ 1.1 which is rather close to the case previously pt e1 analyzed (i.e., total power equally splitted for the two feeding modes). on the other hand, for scanning at a defined frequency of operation, from fig. 14(b) it emerges that the optimum power split for maximizing the scanning range at 30 ghz is /pt e m ∼ 0.82. however, as explained in the given by pt e1 first part of this section, the input matching of the antenna is satisfactory up to ±45◦ in the plane φ = 90◦. such a scanning range is easily achieved for equal power division between the /pt e m = 1 the two feeding modes. specifically, when pt e1 proposed dual mode cts array exhibits an ar lower than 3 db up to ±75.8◦ at the central frequency f0 = 30 ghz.

in this section, we briefly discuss a possible feeding sysem of the circularly polarized cts array. a dual mode pillox coupler, inspired by the architectures presented in and , can be designed to excite a corporate feed network made of bi modal lcppws. the unit cell of a lcppw line is depicted in fig. 15. we restrict our analysis to ppws with height between half a wavelength and a wavelength. the use of lcppws is needed in order to decouple the tem and tm1 modes since this latter is degenerate with fig. 15. unit cell of the dual mode lcppw. the structure is periodic along y axis direction. (a) perspective view. (b) xz plane view (side view). (c) xy plane view (front view).

fig. 16. propagation constants. (b) lcppw propagation constants. dispersion diagram of tem, te1, and tm1 modes. (a) ppw

the te1 mode . in particular, the te1 and tm1 modes are orthogonally polarized and then they do not couple. on the other hand, tem and tm1 modes have the same field orientation and can easily couple each other. this is clear by comparing the dispersion diagrams of conventional and lcppw lines as shown in fig. 16(a) and (b), respectively. both ppw and lcppw lines are filled with air. the geometrical = 0.5λmax ∼ parameters of the lcppw unit cell are ht e1 7.49 mm, ht e m = 0.5λmin ∼ 2.99 mm, wcorr = λmax /20 ∼ 0.74 mm, and pcorr = λmax /10 ∼ 1.49 mm. in fig. 16, it can be noticed that the fundamental tem mode is non dispersive in both ppw and lcppw lines. moreover, using lcppws the te1 and tm1 modes are no longer degenerate. the structure operates in a bi modal regime within the bandwidth 23.5 38.3 ghz. the corrugations slightly shift the cut off frequencies of lcppw modes with respect to those of standard ppws. as result, the effective operative bandwidth is reduced from 66.6% to 50.1%. a summary of the cut off frequencies of different modes is presented for both conventional ppw and lcppw in table ii. additionally, the slots can be fed using coaxial probes or crossed dipoles placed in the very proximity of the aperture . the latter solution helps in mitigating the different dispersive behavior of tem and te1 modes. indeed, the inter modal dispersion occurring between tem and te1 modes is alleviated either feeding the slots as close as possible to the radiating aperture or at higher frequencies [see fig. 16]. the latter observation also emerged from the study carried out in this article. thus, the results presented in section vi will be not be strongly affected by considering the dispersion and the feeding system of the antenna. therefore, the authors believe that this contribution gives a valid starting point to address the design of such proposed dual mode cts array. in other words, in this section we proposed some ideas to engineer the dispersion and the feeding system of the antenna. note that there might be several other ways in addition to the ones proposed here.

an in depth study of a novel circularly polarized cts array has been presented. the array is based on long radiating slots fed by over moded ppw lines. two orthogonally polarized modes (i.e., tem and te1) are employed to feed a shared raditing aperture and, thus, generate circularly polarized fields in the far field zone. a fast in house numerical tool has been developed to address an efficient analysis of this class of cts arrays. in particular, the tool is able to provide the active reflection coefficient and radiation properties of open ended over moded stubs, when both tem and te1 mode excitations are considered. the proposed analysis method is then used to highlight advantages and limitations of this new antenna concept focusing on the array performance, and to provide design guidelines. the ar of the radiated field is evaluated for broadside radiation and scanning along the principal planes of the array. all the results have been validated by full wave simulations, showing a very good agreement. it has been demonstrated that the presented circularly polarized cts array architecture is suitable for wideband, wide angle scanning applications. more precisely, the ar is lower than 3 db over a 52.9% relative bandwidth for broadside radiation. furtherore, the active input reflection coefficient |sact | is lower than −10 db over a 40.8% relative bandwidth when the array steers its main beam at θ0 = 45◦ along the plane parallel to the slots. furthermore, practical designs of finite arrays have been discussed and several solutions to excite the array minimizing the intermodal dispersion have been presented. the small form factor and low profile of the antenna make such architecture an interesting candidate for the next generation of satellite appendix

active admittance for te1 mode

the mathematical expression of admittance for te1 mode is given by the normalized active

where y t e are the wave admittance of te and tm modes, respectively, in ppw and the expressions of (cid:10)(kx ), (cid:11)(kx ), ct e can be found in . moreover, kxn = kx0 + 2πn/d and g h m is the fourier transform of the (i,j)th entry of the green's dyad g h m . and y t m

w. w. milroy, "the continuous transverse stub (cts) array: basic theory, experiment, and application," in proc. antenna appl. symp., vol. 2, 1991, p. 253 283.

w. w. milroy, "continuous transverse stub element devices for flat plate

w. w. milroy, "antenna array configurations employing continuous

transverse stub elements," u.s. patent 5 412 394, may 2, 1995. l. b. felsen and n. marcuwitz, radiation scattering waves. hoboken,

d. m. pozar, microwave engineering, 3th ed. hoboken, nj, usa: wiley,

d. pozar, "the active element pattern," ieee trans. antennas propag.,

c. a. balanis, antenna theory: analysis and design. hoboken, nj, germany, 2017.

michele del mastro was born in avellino, italy, in july 25, 1992. he graduated in clarinet at the conservatorio di musica d. cimarosa, avellino, italy, in 2011, and received the m.sc. degree (summa cum laude) in electronics engineering from the uniersità degli studi di napoli federico ii, naples, italy, in 2017. he is currently pursuing the ph.d. degree in electrical engineering with the institut d'électronique et de télécommunication de rennes (ietr), université de rennes 1, rennes, france.

in 2016, he joined the electronic research labratory, delft university of technology, delft, the netherlands, where he carried out his master's thesis. from may to october 2019, he was a visiting ph.d. student with the radiation laboratory, university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, usa. his research interests include the analysis and design of wideband antenna arrays, numerical modeling, frequency selective surfaces for polarization converters and periodic structures.

mr. del mastro was a co recipient of the best innovation award at the 39th european space agency antenna workshop, noordwijk, the netherlands, in 2018.

francesco foglia manzillo ieee) received the b.sc. and m.sc. degrees (cum laude) in electronics engineering from the university of naples federico ii, naples, italy, in 2010 and 2012, respectively, and the ph.d. degree in signal processng and telecommunications from the university of rennes 1, rennes, france, in 2017. in 2012, he was an intern at (member,

the electronic research laboratory, delft university of technolgy, delft, the netherlands, and at nxp semionductors, eindhoven, the netherlands. in 2016, he spent six months as a visiting ph.d. student at the radiation laboratory, university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, usa. since july 2017, he has been with the french alternative energies and atomic energy commission, labratory of electronics and information technologies (cea leti), grenoble, france. his research interests include the analysis, synthesis, and design of antenna arrays, quasi periodic structures (transmitarrays, frequency selective surfaces, and polarization converters), numerical modeling, and the integration of millimeter wave antenna systems.

dr. manzillo was a co recipient of the best innovation award at the 39th

european space agency antenna workshop in 2018.

david gonzáález ovejero (senior member, ieee) was born in gandía, spain, in 1982. he received the m.s. degree in telecommunication engineering from the universidad politécnica de valencia, valencia, spain, in 2005, and the ph.d. degree in electrical engineering from the université catholique de louain, louvain la neuve, belgium, in 2012.

from 2006 to 2007, he was a research assisant with the universidad politécnica de valencia. from 2007 to 2012, he was a research assistant with the université catholique de louvain. from 2012 to 2014, he was a research associate with the university of siena, siena, italy. in 2014, he joined the jet propulsion laboratory, california institute of technology, pasadena, ca, usa, where he was a marie curie post doctoral fellow. since 2016, he has been a tenured researcher with the french national center for scientific research, institut d'electronique et de télécommunications de rennes, rennes, france.

dr. gonzález ovejero was a recipient of the marie curie international outgoing fellowship from the european commission 2013, the sergei a. schelkunoff transactions prize paper award from the ieee antennas and propagation society in 2016, and the best paper award in antenna design and applications at the 11th european conference on antennas and propagation in 2017. since 2019, he has been an associate editor of the ieee transctions on antennas and propagation and the ieee transactions on terahertz science and technology.