analog/digital hybrid delay locked loop for k/ka band satellite retrodirective arrays

abstract— an analog/digital hybrid delay locked loop (dll) phase conjugator (pc) for use in retrodirective array (rda) applications is proposed, implemented, and measured. compared with previous phase locked loop pc solutions, the proposed dll pc has a number of unique features that make it superior to previous solutions in many applications. these features include: 1) the ability to hold the phases of conjugated outputs even when input pilots disappear; 2) the ability to track the changing rate of phases of input pilots even when the pilot signals with dynamic phases disappear for a short period of time, i.e., the implemented rdas can constantly track a moving target for retransmission even when the incoming pilots are not available due to deep channel fading or time division duplex operation; 3) the dll pc can be flexibly configured as the voltage controlled phase shifters for the use in traditional phased beam steering arrays; 4) the dll pc can indicate direction of arrival of the incoming signals without recourse to any baseband algorithms; and 5) the dll pc is unconditionally stable. the operation of the dll pc is articulated in this paper, and prototypes are built and their performance and functions are tested. in addition, a k /ka band rda demonstrator for satellite communications, based on the proposed dll pc architecture, is implemented and measured, validating the "retro direct" functionality over a wide view angle. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a dll has been used for pc, and it is the first time that a k /ka band rda based on this technology has been experimentally demonstrated.

index terms— delay locked loop (dll), k /ka band, phase conjugator (pc), retrodirective array (rda), satellite communiations (satcom).

a retrodirective array (rda) has the capability to

retransmit a signal back along the spatial direction(s) along which the array was illuminated by the incoming signals without the need for a priori knowledge of their points of origin , . this automatic tracking characteristic makes

manuscript received september 26, 2017; revised march 1, 2018; accepted april 9, 2018. this work was sponsored by the european space agency project—retrodirective antenna, artes 5.1, 7c.014. (corresponding author: yuan ding.)

y. ding is with the institute of sensors, signals and systems, heriot watt

university, edinburgh eh14 4as, u.k. (e mail: yuan.ding@hw.ac.uk).

n. b. buchanan and v. f. fusco are with the institute of electronics, comunications and information technology, queen's university belfast, belfast bt3 9dt, u.k. (e mail: n.buchanan@ecit.qub.ac.uk; v.fusco@ecit.qub.ac.uk). r. baggen and m. martínez vázquez are with imst gmbh, d 47475

m. van der vorst is with the european space agency, 2201 az noordwijk,

the netherlands (e mail: maarten.van.der.vorst@esa.int).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available rda technology useful in many applications, including longange radio frequency identification , microwave power transmission , physical layer wireless spatial encryption , mobile satellite communications (satcom) , , and so on.

there are a variety of rda architectures. these largely fall i.e., passive and active. passive solutions normally refer to "van atta" type structures , which retrodirect wavefronts using symmetrical delay lines positioned between array radiating elements, while active solutions usually involve phase conjugating circuits . in this category, "pon" type phase conjugator (pc) strucures have been extensively investigated. these mixerased arrangements make the rda more flexible, in terms of its physical layout , receive and retransmit frequency offsets , and retransmitted signal capability . however, inherent weaknesses associated with this "pon" type approach include low and nonflat mixer conversion gain, undesired mixing frequency leakage components, and lack of receiver array factor gain. these negative attributes have hindered rda deployment in the field. into two categories,

these problems have recently been largely solved by introducing phase locked loop (pll) based pcs , which have the capability of providing low spurious phaseonjugated signals at constant magnitude. in addition, they have the ability to provide array factor gains on both transmit and receive using simple intermediate frequency (if) summing circuits.

however, the pll pc approach is not suitable in some important applications, including the scenarios: 1) where the receive signals or pilot tones are not constantly available, which, for example, may be the result of deep channel fading or time division duplex (tdd) operation, and are associated with satcom systems of the type in ; 2) where the information about directions of arrival (doas) of incoming pilots are required; and 3) where the flexibility of reconfiguring pc units into phase shifters for classical phased arrays is an additional requirement.

the above weaknesses associated with the pll pcs are rooted in the fact that the output phase adjustents are achieved by altering the frequency of local oscilators (los) during the loop locking process. this leads to: 1) frequency asynchronization when the incoming pilots, which act as the pll frequency references, are unavailable; 2) the identical locking status, i.e., frequency synchronization, for different doas; and 3) no chance of configuring frequency respectively, asynchronized plls into phase shifters. naturally if only the phases, rather than the frequencies, of los in pll pc are used to adjust the loop states, the above mentioned inherent pll pc issues can be sufficiently addressed, and the resulting "plls" are essentially turned into delay locked loops (dlls) . in addition, the proposed dll based pc architecture can provide significant extra useful features and functionalities when a light touch digital module is utilized.

the this paper is organized as follows. in section ii, architecture of the proposed dll pc is presented and its unique features are summarized. detailed dll pc design considerations are elaborated in section iii. the measured dll pc performance and the demonstration of its funcionalities are provided in section iv at around 2.2 ghz due to the availability of the off the shelf components while also facilitating performance comparison with the previously reported pll pc solutions. in section v, an rda using the constructed dll pcs deployed for k /ka band satcom applications is constructed. the experiment, for the first time, validates the "retro direct" functionality in k /ka band in a full duplex fashion. conclusions in this paper presented are finally drawn in section vi.

ii. delay locked loop phase conjugator

the architecture of the proposed dll pc enabled rda is given in fig. 1. it should be noted that although full digital rda solutions using fpga technology can be versatile, they lack real time response due to their required digital signal processing power and computational speed restricions . in addition, the full digital version is also power hungry, especially when the transmission data rates are high, e.g., at a data rate of 20 mbit/s, digital and analog verions require 600 and 89 mw per element, respectively . in the analog/digital hybrid dll solution presented here, only table i

notations of signals in dll pcs

low power low frequency microcontrollers with simple comutational capabilities are necessary. they are used in the feedback network shown in fig. 1. the associated design details are presented in section iii.

in fig. 1, only the reference and the i th (i = 2, . . . , n) chains are depicted for an n element rda. unlike the pll pc solutions, where los in each receive chain used for driving down conversion mixers, i.e., mixer1 and mixer2, are derived thereby resulting in from their own frequency references, phase unlocked los in open loop states, the corresponding lo pairs in dll pcs share a common frequency reference, i.e., lod1 (and lod2), and consequently every receive chain in the array is automatically frequency synchronized. since lo frequencies are fixed, in order to lock the loop in the i th receive chain, a controllable phase delay, which can be placed along either the first or the second down conversion lo paths, is required. in fig. 1 and the following discussions, and in the experimental work presented in this paper, this variable phase delay is inserted to alter the phase of the lod2 at the secondtage frequency down conversion.

the system should be configured as follows:

from (2) we can obtain that

for the system in fig. 1, the phase differences between lod_1 in the i th and the reference receive chains, i.e., the second term on the right hand side in (3), are fixed. when the dll in the i th receive chain is locked, as will be discussed in (1)

(3) section iii, the phase difference of two inputs of the phase detector, i.e., the third term on the right hand side in (3), is constant. as a result, we can rewrite (3) as

is noticed that the phase φd2_i of the i th dll output si equals the conjugated phase of the incomng pilot, i.e., −φin_i , when using their counterparts in the reference chain as references, and when the constant phase (cid:3)i = 0. the method used to calibrate (cid:3)i out is discussed in section iii. after the phase conjugated si is obtained, this can be frequency up converted to retransmit, in retro directive fashion, signals back toward the distant source where the pilot is originated.

the introduction of the dll pc solution endows the constructed rdas with a number of desirable capabilities that are not possible with the previous pll pc architectures. these are summarized as follows.

1) the conjugated outputs of dlls can be held even when the incoming pilots, assuming static phases, disappear. this enables the constructed rda to continue pointing toward the pilot source direction even when the pilot signals are not available, e.g., due to deep channel fading and/or tdd operation. this is not possible with pll solutions, since when the receive pilots are lost, there is no chance to synchronize the frequencies of los in each receive branch as feedback control dc voltages are lost. therefore, the retransmitted directions become arbitrary in terms of both modulation frequencies and spatial beam pointing directions.

2) the conjugated outputs of dlls can keep tracking the phases of incoming pilots by assuming constant phase rate of change, over a short period when the pilot signals disappear. this endows the constructed rda the ability of predictively tracking a moving target even when the acquisition pilot radiated from the target disppears, thereby avoiding the repeated phase acquisition processes associated with fading channels and/or tdd systems.

3) the dll pcs can be configured as variable phase shifters by simply opening the feedback loop in fig. 1. in this way, the rda operates as a traditional phased beam steering array.

4) unlike pll solutions, when the dll pc is locked, in fig. 1, used to set the feedback dc voltages, vci required phase delays can be exploited as an indicator of the incoming signal doa.

5) in order to compensate a fixed phase error, only a firstrder dll is required, which is unconditionally stable, compared to a second order conditionally stable pll required to achieve the same purpose . iii. design considerations

before presenting the dll pc implementation and the rda experiment in sections iv and v, some important design considerations need to be elaborated in regard to rda design for satcom application. a. receive and retransmit antenna arrays

in order to broaden the field of view of an rda, the chosen antennas in both receive and retransmit arrays need to have active element patterns with wide beams. usually, microstrip patch antennas are adopted. for some particular applications, such as satcom , , circular polarization is preferred. receive and retransmit arrays can share the same antenna aperture, e.g., when receiving and retransmitting at the same frequency, a duplexer is added for system to work in tdd mode, or when frequency division duplex (fdd) is adopted, the multiband or wideband antenna elements are required in the arrays. in fdd mode, the conjugated phases need to be scaled according to receive and retransmit frequency ratios, as studied in . alternatively, receive and retransmit can use separate antenna apertures with conjugated phases adjusted according to the electric distance between array elements.

as seen in fig. 1, an if filter is added, whose bandwidth is normally around hundreds of hz, in order to improve the receive sensitivity levels associated with satcom applicaions, typically below −120 dbm. following the if filter, an if amplifier with high gain is used, in order to drive the phase detector above its threshold voltage at very low received power levels.

c. phase detector

there are various types of phase detectors that can be used for the proposed dll pcs in fig. 1. among these, the excluive or type, which operates effectively with both sinusoid and square wave inputs, corresponding to low and high (satuation occurs after if amplifier) receive powers, respectively, is preferred. this amplitude independent characteristic greatly enhances the dynamic range of the receiver. this property is validated in the experiment in the next section.

d. variable phase delay

e. feedback network fig. 2. voltage controlled phase shifter at low frequency.

fig. 3. schematic of feedback network implementation.

this feedback network used in our design is an anaog/digital hybrid circuitry, as shown in fig. 3. a simple first order loop filter, sufficient to correct phase errors in the dll, is placed after each phase detector. this is followed by an operational amplifier (op amp) voltage comparator that functions as a charge pump. the reference voltage, vcomp, shown in fig. 3, determines the constant phase differences between ifi and ifref , i.e.,φ if_i − φif_ref , when the loop is locked. it can be adjusted to make (cid:3)i = 0, enabling phase conjugation as discussed in section ii. the provision of the vcomp provides a simple and effective approach for calibrating each receive chain. the filtered charge pump output is then sampled by a low frequency analog to digital converter (adc) to allow basic logical operations in the digital domain. finally, a digital to analog converter (dac) transforms digtal bits back into an analog dc voltage vci, which is fed back to set the phase delay of the lod2 in the i th receive chain.

the functionalities of the logic units are now described. here, only very basic logic operations are involved and they can be readily fulfilled with a low cost low power digital microcontroller.

1) the array can be easily configured as a traditional phased beam steering array by selecting, from a pretored lookup table, the digital bits sent to the dac inputs to generate the dc voltages vci for required the progressive phase delay distributions across the array. in this mode, the feedback loop is opened.

2) for rda mode, the initial pilot signal phase acquisition is achieved as follows. scan the input bits of the dac from a to b while monitoring the input voltages vadc of the adc. digital bits a and b correspond to two values of vci that set two phase delays separated by 360°. two possible locking points, where middle ranged adc inputs vadc are detected, can then be identified. either locking point can be used. however, this cannot change after selection. different choices of the locking points result in the different vcomp that is tuned to eliminate (cid:3)i in (4). a phase delay scanning range of greater than 360° may lead to more than two possible locking points and should be avoided. 3) for rda mode, after successful initial phase acquiition, the digital modules perform the following two tasks. a) the two digital bits around the locking bit (coresponding to the locking point obtained in the acquisition stage) are repeatedly applied at the input of the dac. if they lead to high (or low) and low (or high) vadc, respectively, at the input of the adc, we know that the locking point is remaining constant. if both lead to either high or low vadc, we know that the input bits of the dac should be increased or decreased to regain the locking point. the new locking bit could be obtained with little effort, because it lies not far from the previous locking bit. the changing patterns of the locking bits against time are recorded. it should be pointed out that the phase wrapping issue associated with dlls can be readily solved with the help of the digital module, because with the availability of the lookup table mapping vci and phase delays the feedback network knows when and how the phases should be wrapped. as an additional benet, the knowledge of vci can provide doa inforation.

b) the output vpdi of the phase detector is repeatedly checked. this can be done using another adc. when the vpdi falls into a predetermined small region, it indicates that the pilot signal disappears. the choice of vcomp should be kept far away from this predetermined region, which is measured and stored in advance, in order to avoid the confusion between the loop locking state and the state when the pilot disappears. once the system notices the absence of the pilot signal, the dll will open the loop and assign the input bits of the dac according to the previously stored patterns of locking bits. so that the constructed rda can automatically hold the retransmission direction along the pilot source or continuously steer the retransmission beam to track the moving pilot source (when the pilot source is in motion before the pilot disapears) in the period when the pilot signal is not available.

the algorithm used for rda mode

operation, is described in

implemented using the digital modules, algorithm 1.

in our prototype, we chose the microcontroller psoc4 from cypress because of its low power consumption, easy programming, and its integration of 12 bit multichannel adc, two current type 7 bit dacs, two op amps, and ample logic resources. in other words, it contains all the compoents that are needed for the feedback network, as shown in fig. 3.

iv. dll pc prototypes algorithm 1 operations of the digital modules in dll feedback loop for rda mode.

sweep input digital bits of dac from a to b, until (cid:129) for the input bit c−1, vadc is low (or high) (cid:129) for the input bit c, vadc is middle ranged (cid:129) for the input bit c+1, vadc is high (or low) c is the locking bit, and go to phase tracking.

2) elseif (for the input bit c−1, vadc is high (or low))

3) elseif (for the input bit c+1, vadc is low (or high))

repeatedly check the existence of the pilot signal:

assign c according to the patterns of previously stored locking bits;

in order to assess performance, the entire receive chain, shown in fig. 1, from low noise amplifier to output si is required. for this purpose, a modular prototype with two entire receive chains was constructed. the inputs of the two chains were directly connected to two 10 mhz phase synchronized signal generators both generating 2.194 ghz signals. one chain was selected as reference, while the s2 (phase delayed lod_2 shown in fig. 1) in the second dll pc enabled receive chain was measured. the phases (φd2_2 − φd2_ref) (after (cid:3)2 being calibrated out) against the phase differences between two input signals (φin_2 φin_ref ) were measured and are depicted in fig. 4 for various input signal power levels. it can be concluded from fig. 4 that over a large dynamic range of 125 db (from 0 to −125 dbm), the phases of the input signals can be conjugated using the proposed dll pc structure with worst case phase errors of less than 14°.

during the experiment, we identified some sources causing

1) the spurious and phase noise of the frequency synhesizer, i.e., adf4360 1 used in the prototype, for lod2 could generate low magnitude if signals at the frequency fif at the input ports of the phase detector, as the results of coupling and circuit nonlinearity. the phases of these if signals do not linearly dependent on the phases of sr and si , affecting the correctness of the calibrated (cid:3)i in (4), especially when the power of input pilot signals is low, and, hence, the conjugated phases. these resultant if signals, with unpredictable magnitudes and phases, have different impacts on phase fig. 4. power levels. phase conjugation experimental results for various receive signal

fig. 5. measured feedback dc voltage vc2 against the phase differences (φin_2 φin_ref ) between two input signals for various input signal power levels.

errors when the phase differences of input pilot signals vary. this phenomenon can be more severe when the multiple dll pcs operate closely in space and this is an important factor that limits the sensitivity of the designed dll pcs;

2) the resolution and speed of the dac in the feedback the phase noise of lod2. thus, network can affect through the same mechanism described in 1), phase errors occur.

in order to reduce the phase errors and further enhance the dll pcs' sensitivity down to −130 dbm, we plan to test a series of options, e.g., choosing frequency synthesizers with better spectrum purity and phase noise, redesigning circuit layout to reduce coupling, constructing phase shifters directly fd2 without frequency synthesizers, and selecting hight speed high resolution dacs with reasonable power consumpion. future results on performance improvement and system integration will be reported timely.

the feedback control voltage vc2 was also measured and is plotted in fig. 5. once the control voltage vc2, and hence the associated phase difference, is obtained, the doa θ (measured from the array boresight) can be calculated through where k is the wavenumber in free space and d is the antenna spacing. in fig. 5, it can also be seen that the voltage can be automatically wrapped when the predefined boundaries, e.g., 0.7 and 1.2 v (corresponding to the dac input bits a and b) used in the above experiment, are reached, indicating continuous phase tracking ability unconstrained by the limited phase range of the phase delay circuitry.

next, four integrated dll boards targeting for k /kaand satcom applications were designed and fabricated. for function demonstration purpose, one reference board and one dll board were measured. here, the frequency of the input signal, which is the signal before the mixer2 in fig. 1, and the fd2 were set to be 2195.81 mhz and 2.2 ghz, respectively, resulting in fif = 4.19 mhz.

the video of the experiment can be accessed in . in the

1) the dll works for both continuous wave and qpskodulated (pn sequence) input signals.

2) the dll can hold the phases of the output signals when the input signals with static phases disappear. this confirms the claim 1) in section ii.

3) the dll can continuously track the phases of the input signals even when the input signals with changng phases disappear for a short period of time. this confirms the claim 2) in section ii. v. dll pc enabled k /ka band rda

a fully functional k /ka band rda based on the proposed dll pc was designed and assembled. we chose k /ka band, because rda equipped ground terminals can provide great benefits for the fast growing k /ka band satellite broadband connections , e.g., rda user transceivers on moving vehiles can automatically beamform toward the target satellites. the detailed design information about the dll pc enabled

k /ka band rda is provided in table ii.

the block diagram and the photograph of the dll pcnabled k /ka band rda experiment setup in an anechoic chamber are shown in figs. 6 and 7, respectively. in fig. 6, the dll pc module has the same structure as that shown in fig. 1, except for the lod2 that is generated using the freuency synthesizer adf4360 1 (sharing a common 10 mhz reference). the reference receive chain is similar to the dll pc module, but without the feedback network and the phase shifter. measured monostatic pattern of the rda retransmisions is given in fig. 8. with repeated measurements and individual antenna test, we noticed that the ripples on the meaured and calculated monostatic patterns were mainly caused by the unwanted radiation from coaxial cables connecting the antenna elements and rf circuits. thus, smoothed fitting curves are also shown in fig. 8. this issue will be fixed in the future by integrating antennas and rf circuits on a single board.

the implemented k /ka band rda was capable of retrodirecting the pilot source over a wide spatial range, i.e., from −50° (or −55°) to 40° (or 50°) for gain flatness of about 3 db (or 5 db). the calulated monostatic pattern, obtained using measured antenna active element patterns, also plotted in fig. 8, has slightly higher gains when compared with its measured counterpart. this is mainly caused by the nonideally calibrated (cid:3)i in the monostatic pattern measurements, leading to beam pointing errors and reduced beamforming gains . it is noted that in fig. 8, it can be clearly seen that fig. 6. block diagram of dll pc enabled k /ka band rda experiment setup.

fig. 7. photograph of dll pc enabled k /ka band rda experiment setup.

comparison between the measured rda monostatic pattern and fig. 8. calculated monostatic pattern. receive at 20 ghz and retransmit at 29.5 ghz. vi. conclusion

in this paper, we have proposed a new type of phase conjuating architecture based on an analog/digital hybrid dll. the proposed dll pc solution has a number of useful features that are not available with the previously reported pc solutions. the prototypes of the dll pcs, and its first ever k /ka band rda demonstrator, were successfully implemented and meaured to assess their superior phase conjugation performance, e.g., the large input dynamic range of 125 db and the input signal sensitivity down to as low as −125 dbm, and to validate their unique functionalities, such as holding or tracking the conjugated phases even when the incoming pilots are lost. the proposed analog/digital hybrid dll pcs should find many applications where robust and flexibly reconfigurable rda/phased array deployment are required.

the authors would like to thank k. rainey for the assistance

on the k /ka band retrodirective array experiment.

v. fusco and n. buchanan, "developments in retrodirective array iet microw., antennas propag., vol. 7, no. 2,

p. chan and v. fusco, "bi static 5.8 ghz rfid range enhancement using retrodirective techniques," in proc. 41st eur. microw. conf. (eumc), oct. 2011, pp. 976 979. l. c. van atta, "electromagnetic reflector," u.s. patent 2 908 002 a, http://www.google.co.uk/ [online]. available:

c. y. pon, "retrodirective array using the heterodyne technique," ieee

j. y. park and t. itoh, "a 60 ghz 4th subharmonic phase conjugated (eumc),

d. goshi, k. leong, and t. itoh, "a retrodirective array with interference rejection capability," in ieee mtt s int. microw. symp. dig., jun. 2005, p. 4.

d. m. k. ah yo, w. e. forsyth, and w. a. shiroma, "a self oscillating mixer array [using hemts]," jun. 2000,

n. b. buchanan, t. brabetz, and v. f. fusco, "a 62/66 ghz frequency offset retrodirective array," in ieee mtt s int. microw. symp. dig., jun. 2002, pp. 315 318.

n. b. buchanan and v. f. fusco, "quadrant switching pll phase conjugator for retrodirective antenna applications," in ieee mtt s int. microw. symp. dig., jun. 2008, pp. 791 794.

n. b. buchanan, v. f. fusco, and m. van der vorst, "a high performance analogue retrodirective phase conjugation circuit with rx array factor combination ability," in ieee mtt s int. microw. symp. dig., jun. 2011, pp. 1 4.

tone reference less phase conjugator for phase modulated retrodirective antenna applications," ieee antennas wireless propag. lett., vol. 15, pp. 298 300, 2016.

in phaseocking in high performance systems: from devices to architectures, b. razavi, ed. new york, ny, usa: wiley, 2003, pp. 13 22.

n. b. buchanan, v. f. fusco, m. van der vorst, n. williams, and c. winter, "new retrodirective antenna techniques for mobile terinal applications," in proc. 32nd antenna workshop, esa/estec, noordwijk, the netherlands, 2010, pp. 1 5. a. winterstein, l. a. greda, and a. dreher, "a pll based retroirective antenna system for communications with arbitrary frequency gaps," in proc. 9th eur. conf. antennas propag. (eucap), lisbon, portugal, apr. 2015, pp. 1 5.

datasheet on chip. 27, http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/psoc 4 psoc 4200amily datasheet programmable system chip 0 4200 family programmable

systemvailable: accessed: apr. 2018. [online].

yuan ding received the bachelor's degree in electronic engineering from beihang university, beijing, china, the master's degree in electronic engineering from tsinghua university, beijing, in 2007, and the ph.d. degree in electronic engineering from queen's university belfast, belfast, u.k., in 2014. in 2004,

from 2007 to 2009, he was a radio frequency engineer with the motorola r&d centre, beijing. from 2009 to 2011, he was an rf field application inc., engineer with freescale semiconductor, beijing, where he was involved in high power base station amplifier design. he is currently an assistant professor with the institute of sensors, signals and systems, heriot watt university, edinburgh, u.k. his current research interests include antenna array, physical layer security, and 5g related areas. dr. ding was a recipient of the iet best student paper award of the loughborough antennas & propagation conference 2013 and the young scientists award of the general assembly and scientific symposium, 2014 xxxist ursi.

neil b. buchanan received the b.eng. degree (hons.) and ph.d. degree from queen's university belfast, belfast, u.k., in 1993 and 2000, respecively. his ph.d. thesis concerned phase locked millimeter wave hemt oscillators.

he has recently led a research activity with the european space agency (esa), noordwijk, the netherlands, to produce a trl5 self steered antenna for use with satellite broadband services. he is currently a lecturer with queen's university belfast. he has authored or co authored over 70 scientific papers in major journals and in refereed international conferences. he has been involved in several world class research projects. his current research interests include novel phase conjugating architectures for self steered antenas, millimeter wave (mm wave) mmic design, and innovative mm wave transceivers.