this article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this magazine. content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

beam space multiplexing: practice, theory, and trends, from 4g td lte, 5g, to 6g and beyond

shanzhi chen, shaohui sun, xin su and yuemin cai are with the china academy of telecommunications technology (catt); guixian xu is with aarhus university. shanzhi chen, shaohui sun, guixian xu, xin su, and yuemin cai

abstract in this article, the new term, namely beam space multiplexing, is proposed for the former multi layer beamforming for 4g td lte in 3gpp releases. we provide a systematic overview of beam space muliplexing from engineering and theoretical perspecives. first, we clarify the fundamental theory of beam space multiplexing. specifically, we provide a comprehensive comparison with antenna space multiplexing in terms of theoretical analysis, chanel state information acquisition, and engineering implementation constraints. then, we summarize the key technologies and 3gpp standardization of beam space multiplexing in 4g td lte and 5g new radio (nr) in terms of multi layer beamformng and massive beamforming, respectively. we also provide system level performance evaluation of beam space multiplexing schemes and field results from current commercial td lte networks and field trial of 5g. the practical deployments of 4g td lte and 5g cellular networks demontrate the superiority of beam space multiplexing within the limitations of implementation complexty and practical deployment scenarios. finally, the future trends of beam space multiplexing in 6g and beyond are discussed, including massive beamforming for extremely large scale mimo (xl mimo), low earth orbit (leo) satellite commuication, data driven intelligent massive beamformng, and multi target spatial signal processing, that is, joint communication and sensing, positioning, and so on.

introduction in the past 20 years, physical layer technologies such as multiple access waveform, modulation, coding and time and frequency domains multilexing have been flourishing over the evolution of cellular systems. however, in 2g and 3g/ b3g, time frequency domain technology had been thoroughly explored to increase the system capacity. instead, multiple input multiple output (mimo), also known as multi antenna technology, has great potential to increase spectral efficiency (se) and system capacity by spatial multiplexing, which has been regarded as the core technoloy in 4g long term evolution (lte) systems and 5g new radio (nr). historically, multi antenna technology has evolved from passive to active, from two dimensional (2d) to three dimensional (3d), from a few antennas to large scale arrays (massive mimo) . the performances benefited by mimo in cellular systems are summarized as follows: • antenna gain: array gain from multi antenna can prolong battery life, extend cellular range, and provide higher throughput.

diversity gain: spatial diversity from multi antena can improve reliability and robust operation of services.

multiplexing gain: multi stream transmission can provide higher data rates.

interference suppression: transmit and/or receive (tx/rx) interference rejection combiation (irc) can increase the signal to interfernce plus noise ratio (sinr) and improve link reliability and robustness. spatial multiplexing in mimo systems provides spatial multiplexing gain, which increases system capacity by subdividing an outgoing signal stream into multiple data pipes yet suffers from power efficiency. beamforming provides significant array gains, thereby providing an increased signal tooise ratio (snr), also known as power gain. to achieve array gain and multiplexing gain simultaeously, beamforming based spatial multiplexing or multi layer beamforming was thus proposed, which serves as a milestone in the development of multi antenna technology and plays a crucial role in the third generation partnership project (3gpp) lte standardization of the enhancement of multi antenna schemes. in this article, multi layer beamforming is termed beam space multiplexing. it was first proposed by the authors' team of china academy of telecomunications technology (catt)/datang in lte release 9 (rel 9) to support single user/multi user dual layer beamforming . the following rel 10 can support up to eight layers of beam space muliplexing that further enhanced the multiplexing gain [3, 4]. beam space multiplexing for coordinate multiple point (comp) transmission was then stanardized in rel 11 for multi cell systems. the target is not only for the mitigation of intra cell interfernce but also for that of the inter cell interference. afterwards, the enhancements of downlink four anenna transmission technology and improvements of comp technology were further optimized in rel 12. besides that, 3d (including both the hor since 2011, eight antenna base station (bs) with beam space multiplexing has been widely deployed in commercial time division lte (td lte) 4g cellular networks. however, lte bss with freuency division duplex (fdd) are mainly equipped with 2 antennas and adopted with antenna space multiplexing. fdd bss have seldom four antennas. as reported by the global td lte initiative (gti) white paper, td lte cellular networks have 50 perent more area coverage than that of lte fdd in typical deployments, which means that 33 percent of bs installation cost can be saved . currently, the total number of 4g commercial bs's global installation is about 6.31 million. among them, the number of td lte bss is 2.89 million, including 1.5 million eight antenna bss. there are 4 billion 4g subscribers globally, of which td lte has 1.8 billion subscribers.

in 5g networks, beam, formed by a bs with large scale antenna array, is much narrower. it provides extremely high directional selectivity and array gain . furthermore, bs operates at mmwave frequencies can pack more antennas within a small size of an antenna array. built with high spatial resolution, an antenna array can coniderably increase the data rate while reducing power consumption. however, the acquisition of channel state information (csi) becomes an essenial issue. in fdd systems, csi can be obtained through csi estimation and feedback. as the numer of bs antennas is increased, the size of refernce signal symbols and feedback cost overheads are unfeasible high. alternatively, channel reciprocty in time division duplex (tdd) systems can be used to conquer such problems . thus, tdd systems with beam space multiplexing in terms of massive beamforming will be the mainstay in development of multiple antenna technology for the upcoming 5g . moreover, beam domain signal processing, especially beam space multiplexng will play an important role in 6g and beyond, which is viewed as an intelligent network enabled by machine learning (ml). in this article, we outline several potential research directions and challengs: massive beamforming for extremely large scale mimo (xl mimo), low earth orbit (leo) satellite communication, and data driven intelligent massive mimo. besides, multi target spatial signal processng for joint communication and sensing with masive mimo needs further investigations.

inspired by the successful engineering practics of beam space multiplexing, this article intends to provide a comprehensive overview from both engineering and theoretical perspectives. this article will systematically summarize beam space multiplexing, from the theoretical analysis to appliations in the scope of 3gpp 4g td lte and 5g cellular systems. furthermore, the emerging massive beamforming in 5g and further research trends in 6g and beyond are envisioned.

organization of this article: in the next secion, we first introduce fundamental principles of beam space multiplexing and analyze engineering feasibility related to antenna space multiplexing. the standardization, system level simulations, and field test results of transmission schemes are sumarized with focusing on beam space multiplexing in 4g td lte and 5g. lastly, future research direc beam space multiplexng sufficiently utilizes the advantages of both beamforming and spatial multiplexing. with beamforming techniques, the beam patterns of transmit and receive antenna array can be steered in a number of certain desired directions, whereas undesired directions (e.g., direcions of significant interference) can be suppressed ("nulled").

2 table 1. comparison of antenna space multiplexing, traditional beamforming and beam space multiplexing.

simultaneously and expand the coverage with high data rate. in principle, it would suffer from power leakage and inter user inference if the direction of selected beams from the fixed codebook were not exactly pointed to the user direction and could not eliminate interference to other co scheduled users. however, if full csi is available at the network side, for example, in tdd system, such issues can be alleviated with more accurate non codebookased beamforming.

we first review the multiplexing capacity of deterministic mimo channels with antenna space multiplexing. for antenna space multiplexing, the capacity for a single user with time invariant chanel is

⎞ ⎟ ⎠ where nmin := min(nt, nr) and mi is the i th singuar value (descending order) of channel h that represents the spatial channel with nt transmit antennas and nr receive antennas; n0 denotes the noise power at the receiver and p*1, …, p*k are the allocated power for spatial parallel sub chanels determined by water filling . at high snr, equal power allocation policy is the asymptoticaly optimal, the capacity can be derived by

where snr = ptotal/n0 and k also denotes the number of spatial degrees of freedom offered by multiple antennas.

with beam space multiplexing, the received sigal vector at the receiver can be expressed as y = hvs + n, where v ∈ cntr is the optimal beamorming matrix with r beams such that the spatial multiplexing shifts to beam domain from antenna domain, and n is the additive noise at the receiver. when r = 1, it is traditional beamforming. then, the capacity is cbeam = log2(1 + snrm2 1) such that high power efficiency is gained. assuming the effective channel hv has r non zero singular values, and r ≤ k. similarly, the achievable capacity can be written as

∑ i=1 as a result, we can see that the receive snr can be improved without extra power consumption while multiplexing gain could also be achieved by beam space multiplexing. dedicated directional signal

beam domain: single beam signal processing

multiple dedicated directional signal beam domain: multi beam signal processing

(2) comparison of csi acquisition between tdd and fdd in order to align beam to each spatial data piece of beam space multiplexing accurately, csi should be acquired at the bs before the transmission. in fdd systems, csi can be obtained through refrence signal training and quantized feedback. however, the performance is limited by several non ideal factors, such as feedback delay, quanization error, and imperfect csi estimation at the user side. this will lead to the engineering implementation challenge due to heavy overhead of real time feedback. the limitation becomes extremely severe in 5g, where the number of antennas in the bs is huge and the reference sigal symbols are limited. the required independent reference signal symbols are proportional to the number of antennas at the bs. the number of available reference signal symbols is fundamenally limited by the channel coherence time. thus, the reference signal symbols will become insuffiient for accurate channel estimation in fdd sysems with a large number of antennas at the bs.

recently, compressed sensing (cs) based chanel estimation methods have been proposed to reduce the reference signal overhead for fdd massive mimo systems, for example, orthogonal matching pursuit (omp) and least absolute shrinkge and selection operator (lasso) algorithm . it has shown that the massive mimo channel usually exhibits abundant sparsity in certain transormed domains due to limited local scatters in physical environments. however, there are some drawbacks for the cs based algorithms. for examle, group sparsity and other sparse structure in the different domains are not well exploited because of the limitation of the solution for the cs optiization problem. to overcome this problem, a structured compressing sensing (scs) based spaio temporal joint channel estimation scheme is proposed to reduce the required pilot overhead, whereby the spatio temporal common sparsity of delay domain mimo channels is leveraged. moreover, the design of non orthogonal pilot for cs based adaptive csi acquisition for improving channel estimation performance.

alternatively, in tdd systems, channel reciprocty property can be utilized for csi acquisition. the pilot overhead for csi estimation in tdd massive mimo systems is only proportional to the number of users. furthermore, as shown in fig. 2, in conrast to fdd systems, the computational complexty for csi estimation in tdd system is relatively much lower . however, strict synchronization and antenna calibration are required to guarantee the channel reciprocity because reciprocity holds only in air channel between the bs and user side. if the transceiver of bs and users are considered, downlink and uplink channels are no longer recipocal. thus, in practice, calibration is needed to restore channel reciprocity. recently, user assistd calibration is an enabling technology for tdd massive mimo in 5g, which yields fast calibration processing with low overhead and high calibration accuracy. it is expected that more efficient calibraion algorithms can emerge such that the multi fold gain of massive mimo in tdd network can be fully realized.

comparison of engineering implementation we compare beam space multiplexing with the traditional antenna space multiplexing by considring the practical engineering implementation constraints. for practical implementation with antenna space spatial multiplexing, large spaced (i.e., 4 ∼ 10l) two and four antennas were used to provide enough decorrelation of multiple antenna signals, which facilitates multi stream transmission for cell center users. however, for cell edge users, it will fall back to spatial diversity. from the engineering point of view, the number of bs antennas will be limited to a practical figre. if we want to further increase the number of antennas, two possible antenna array architecures of the antenna space multiplexing are illusrated in fig. 3:

compact antenna array: several antenas within one large panel or multiple antennas installed independently with different poles alternaively. a large panel will result in a large windward area and heavy weight, which is difficult to satisy the engineering constraints: weight should less than 47 kg, windward area should less than 0.6 m2 (source: china tower). the multi poles soluion makes it difficult to be installed on an ordinary tower. hence, in practice, the number of antenas is limited to 4 ∼ 8, and the inter antenna disance usually reduced from 4l to 1 ∼ 2l. this will obviously decrease the spatial multiplexing perforance.

distributed antennas: a theoretical architecure of massive distributed antennas is illustrated as many small sites scattered within the cell area, each site with one or few antennas, so the distance between different antennas is far than 10l. centralzed baseband processing is accomplished through ideal fronthaul fibers. this architecture can give a promising performance, but is extremely difficult in engineering. both hard for site acquisition, distributd antenna calibration, fiber laying, and distributed massive mimo architecture will suffer from high installation and maintenance costs.

in contrast, beam space multiplexing makes it easier. the antenna space is usually l/2, a large number of antennas can be realized within a practical panel size. in addition, as higher carrier frequency is introduced into 5g system, cell radis gets much smaller, the probability of the user located at the interference limited/cell edge area is greatly increased. beamforming can improve the snr for cell edge users by high array gain, which may still keep beam space multiplexing.

in summary, beam space multiplexing is a feaible technical scheme and innovation under engieering constraints (volume, power consumption, weight, cost and implementations, and so on). it has solved three main scientific and engineering problems of using mimo technologies in current

4 figure 4. downlink performance of diff erent transmission schemes in td lte: a) se of cell average and cell edge user; (b) downlink

in multi layer beamforming for tdd systems, with full csi at the transmitter side, an optimized beam can be formed by adjusting the weights applied on the array to match the eigenvector of each layer. therefore, the peak data rate for users with favorable channel characteristics can be sigifi cantly improved.

from the system level perspective, if the sysem load is high enough, it is naturally to allocate a group of users with the same set of time frequeny resources and diff erentiate them with diff erent beams in spatial domain. in multi user multi layer beamforming, an overall optimization in schedulng, beamforming and adaptive modulation and coding (amc) can be achieved at system level. consequently, the gains of multi user time frequeny selective scheduling, beamforming as well as spatial multiplexing can be obtained by the system. besides the capability of enhancing spectrum effi ciency for each cell independently in single cell operation, beamforming technology also offers a fl exible way of mitigating interference among cells. that is, through network level coordination, a cluser of cells can optimize beamforming and schedling jointly to minimize the inter site interference. what's more, the antenna array of multiple site can be used jointly to form beams to further enhance the transmission.

with the introduction of active antenna system (aas) technology, it is possible to have more controlable antenna ports as baseband. therefore, higher spaial degree of freedom are available for implementing more fl exible beamforming technology. for example, for a planner array, the beam can be formed in both horizontal and vertical domains to fully match the actul spatial propagation properties of signal in 3d space. in practice, such 3d beamforming technology can be used to enhance the outdoor to indoor coverage of high rise buildings. for cell edge users, higher fl exiility can be used for inter cell interference mitigation or coordination. for the single user case, each user can be served with more accurate beams, and hence higher channel quality can be achieved. for multi user transmission, with higher spatial resolution, more users are possible to be co scheduled to improve the system se. the inter user interference can also be better mitiated with such 3d beams. standardization

beam space multiplexing was first introduced in lte rel 9 to support single user dual layer transmission (transmit mode 8, tm8) with two beams, as well as multi user multiplexing. furhermore, lte release 10 can support up to eight layers of beam space multiplexing, with further enhancments of the multiplexing gain, and being called tm9. it is designed to help the interference minimization between base stations, and to maximize signal stability, as well as to boost performance. the new tm9 enables the enhancement of high network capabilities and performances with the minimum added overhead. tm9 is designed to combine the advantages of se (using higher order mimo) and the higher data rates of cell edge users, the coverage and interference management (using beam space multiplexing). note that the flexile switching among single layer, multiple layer, single user, multiple user, and beam space muliplexing schemes is possible within tm9. beampace multiplexing for comp transmission (tm10) in multi cell was also standardized in lte release 11, targeting the mitigation of not only intra cell interference, but also inter cell interference . the 3gpp lte release 12 furher optimizes multi antenna technology includng enhancements of the downlink four antenna transmission technology and comp technology, and studies in two dimensional (referring to horzontal dimension and vertical dimension).

system evaluation and field results it has been shown the benefi ts of beam space muliplexing in the link level. in this section, we present numbers of results from system level simulations and performance of running commercial networks. first, beam space multiplexing schemes are evalated by system level simulation platform. the simulation is carried out by software written in c/ c++. the itu urban macro (uma) scenario is contructed with 19 bss, each bs covers three sectors, and 10 users are uniformly dropped in each sector. each sector is equipped with eight cross polarized transmitting antennas, and there are two receiving

ieee wireless communications • accepted for publication during the evaluation, single user transmission is assumed for tm3, tm7 and tm8 in a single cell network while maximum four users/cell could be scheduled for tm10 in a homogeneous network with three co located cells sharing the same bs. in addition, multiple user transmission is enabled.

for lte tm3, 2  2 mimo open loop spatial multiplexing was adopted. it is evident from fig. 4a that tm7 (single layer beamforming) can achieve 156 percent se gain for cell edge users because tm7 provides link reliability due to beamforming gain. tm8 combines spatial multiplexing and beamorming, enabling multiple layers of transmission in the beam space domain while retaining beamformng gains.

as shown in the fig. 4a, there is 16 percent performance gain of cell average se for tm8 over tm7 with single user transmission. coordinated beamforming with lte tm10 is also evaluated. it is shown that tm10 provides significant gain for cell average se users as well as se for cell edge users. with coordinated beamforming in multiple cells, judiciously selected user and beamforming weight can lower interference.

moreover, we present test results of different multi antenna transmission schemes in the comercial td lte networks of china mobile. the test case was carried out in a densely populated urban area with 20 mhz bandwidth with frequency 2575 ∼ 2595 mhz, where users are randomly distributd in a specific cell. to model the different intererence loads in a specific cell, interference signals were transmitted from neighboring cells with 0 percent, 50 percent or 70 percent time frequency resource reuse from the interesting cell. the test is traversing a continuous coverage area consisting of 19 bss. as shown in fig. 4b, tm7 performed much better than tm3 over all interference load. in particular, users may experience low sinr with 50 percent and 70 percent interference load and tm3 may not be able to support spatial multiplexing transmission. then, multi layer beamforming was compared to single layer beamforming by evaluatng lte tm8 and tm7 with single user transmission. from the test results, 15 percent cell throughput gain can be achieved by adopting multi layer transmission. lastly, to demonstrate the benefits of multi user transmission, lte tm8 with/without multi user transmission is evaluated. from the test results, there is 5 ∼ 10 percent performance gain being achieved with multi user transmission. beam space multiplexing in 5g: massive beamforming the 5g nr air interface is expected to satisfy the requirements of three deployment scenaris: enhanced mobile broadband (embb), masive machine type communications (mmtc) and ultra reliable and low latency communications (urllc). the performance gains in terms of sysem capacity, user experience as well as spectral and energy efficiency with massive mimo were proven by theoretical research in . based on that theory, with the increase of antenna number, the channels of different users tend to be orthognal to each other. consequently, furthermore, as the beam becomes narrower and the gain is high the 5g nr air interace is expected to satisfy the requirements of three deployment scenarios: enhanced mobile broadband (embb), massive machine type comunications (mmtc) and ultra reliable and low latency commuications (urllc). the performance gains in terms of system capacty, user experience as well as spectral and energy efficiency with massive mimo were proven by theoretical research.

6 form for the network to control more antennas in both horizontal and vertical domains. therefore, as promised by massive mimo theory, the more flexible beamforming transmission/reception can be achieved for more precisely matching of 3d channel properties of larger number of users in practical system.

standardization related standardization works in 3gpp started with study items on full dimension mimo (fd mio), an initial version of massive mimo based on planar antenna array of aas. in rel 13, a study conducted for mimo enhancements to extend the current support from 8 up to 64 transmit antennas was conducted, thus targeting a massive number of controllable antenna elements at the bs. the study considered simultaneous horizontal and vertical adaptive transmission, utilizing 2d antenna arrays with both closed loop and open loop (beamforming) operation modes. enhanced feedback and cell sounding for both closed and open loop operations offer significant perormance improvement for both single user and multi user mimo (su mimo and mu mimo), which led to standard enhancements for up to 16 antennas in rel 13. in rel 14, the mimo evoution will continue, targeting up to 32 transmit antennas. currently, both su mimo and mu mio, the performance limitation is related to the quality of the channel knowledge at the transmiter. it motivates the investigation of new feedback methods for high resolution feedback and for the existing precoding codebook based scheme. the challenge is how to get sufficiently good transitter channel knowledge for fdd and tdd when full reciprocity is not available, for instance when the terminal has less transmit antennas than receive antennas.

in 5g nr rel 15, massive mimo antenna sysems are extended to support a maximum of 256 antenna elements for sub 6 ghz frequencies. for future deployment of nr system in mmwave band, an active antenna array with tens to hunreds of elements can be allocated in inches, which efficiently take advantage of massive beamorming. targeting higher requirements on system performance and more flexible deployment scearios, the design and standardization of massive beamforming technology encounters more chalenges in 5g. hence, the following aspects need to be considered:

frequency band: due to the lack of frequency resources below 6 ghz, further extension of freuency band is one of the most important ways for nr system to achieve the requirement for 5g. in rel 15, up to 52.6 ghz can be supported, whereas in the upcoming releases, up to 100 ghz frequeny bands will be considered. in higher frequency bands, more spectrum resources are available. however, the propagation characteristics such as path loss, blockage, penetration loss, and so on, tend to be more severe to wireless communicaion system. in such a case, massive beamforming serves as an important approach to overcome the disadvantages of propagation environments and offer flexible coverage to the system in mmwave bands.

with the increase of carrier frequency, the size of antenna array can be reduced accordingly. or, for the antenna array with the same size, more antennas can be used. in the other words, the extension of mimo dimension is also benefited by the increase of carrier frequency. on the other hand, considering the cost, power consumption and complexity, it is hard to implement full digial antenna array in mmwave bands. therefore, a more reasonable solution is the so called hybrid antenna array. based on such a structure, a twotep beamforming, or hybrid analog and digital beamforming has to be used. in analog domain, as the channel cannot be estimated for each pair of antennas via reference signal inserted in digital domain, the mechanism for beam searching, trackng, reporting and recovery need to be established. in the standardization of nr system, the aforemenioned schemes were categorized as beam mangement and beam failure recovery.

in order to compensate possibly large path loss, high gain beams are usually used in mmwave bands. compared with sub 6 ghz, the use of narrower beams in higher frequency bands also limits the effective spread of rays in both angular and time domain. consequently, the selectivity properties of beamformed equivalent channel are changed as well. therefore, the selection of system parameters regarding factors such as beamforming and scheduling granularity are reconsidered for above 6 ghz bands. besides, some other issues also need to be considered. for example, the impact of phase noise on demodulation and more realistic studies of mmwave mobility support and system evaluation and field trial need further invesigations.

enhancement of multi user mimo: although there are abundant frequency resources available in mmwave bands, considering the increasing of users and traffic load in the future, improvement of spectrum efficiency is still of great importance to the 5g system. with large scale antenna array and more flexible 3d beamforming capability, massive beamforming can be used to further enhance the performance of multi user transmission. compared with single user beamforming, the performance of mu mimo relies heavily on the accuracy of beamforming and scheduling based on csi feedack. to that end, channel reciprocity can be used for the network side to acquire csi precisely for tdd system. for the case there is no channel recprocity does not hold, codebook based feedback mechanisms can still be used. in nr, two types of codebooks were adopted. namely, the type i codebook for ordinary csi feedback, for example, for su mimo, and higher resolution type ii codeook is optimized for mu mimo. depending on the configuration of type ii codebook, the overead for precoding matrix indicator (pmi) reportng could be rather large. the trade off between overhead and performance gain should thus be considered carefully in actual implementation of such mechanism.

flexibility: aiming at more flexible deployment scenarios and diverse kinds of traffics, the design and standardization of massive beamforming schemes for 5g should fully consider the flexibility in parameter configuration and system operation. as shown in the following examples, such requireents on flexibility were reflected in aspects such as reference signal and csi feedback framework designs in nr. figure 5. system evaluation and fi eld trial of massive beamforming: a) and b) the performance of massive beamforming schemes in fdd and tdd; c) an example of a 256 element active antenna array (prototype testing with 256 antenna elements array and with channel reciprocity at 3.5 ghz frequency); d) comparison of throughput performance of 5g massive beamforming and 4g lte system.

for the sake of forward compatibility and power consumption reduction, the always on signals like cell specific reference signal (crs) in lte are avoided as much as possible. depending on the actual usage, csi rs can be confi gured to transmit in given time frequency resources. the number of ports and the purpose of csi rs are all configurable. in addition, the desired csi rs patern can be obtained based on the aggregation of basic patterns.

to reduce the decoding delay and to meet the requirement of certain low latency traffi c, the fi rst symbol of demodulation reference signal (dm rs) in time domain is located to be close to the begining of scheduling duration as much as possible. for diff erent mobility, one, two or even three sets of additional dm rs symbols can be configured. similar design is adopted for both downlink and uplink to better overcome inter link interference between diff erent links. two types of dm rs with different densities and the number of orthogonal ports can be confi gured for diff erent scenarios. a unified feedback framework is introduced in 5g nr, based on which both csi and beam measure

8 system. utilizing channel reciprocity in tdd alleiates the problem of csi acquisition. this makes tdd a more promising candidate for a 5g system with large antenna array.

fig. 5c shows a prototype of active antenna array with 256 elements developed by catt/ datang in 2016, where four elements are grouped to form a panel and 64 panels form a panel array. each panel is mapped to two txrus, one on each polarization. at the first phase, it supports 20 parllel streams transmission such that peak data rate could exceed 4 gb/s, and the upgraded one could support 32 streams with the peak transmission rate of 6 gb/s. compared with 4g technology, it can achieve 5∼10 times spectrum efficiency improveent.

in fig. 5d, the field test results from 5g massive beamforming and 4g lte system are shown. the carrier frequency of 5g massive beamforming and 4g lte system are 3.5 ghz and 2.6 ghz, respecively. the system bandwidth is 100 mhz, while 20 mhz bandwidth is used for 4g lte system. the active antenna array used for 5g massive beamorming is equipped with 64 digital channels and 192 antenna elements. for lte system in the field test, an 8 antenna array is used for each site.

based on the test results, it is observed that 5g massive beamforming outperforms 4g lte system significantly in most parts of the interested covrage area. the peak throughput as high as 1.6 gb/s can be obtained for users in the most advanageous locations. with higher carrier frequency, the system performance of 5g massive beamformng is more sensitive to the distance. therefore, the change of throughput curves for 5g massive beamforming tend to be steeper compared with that of a 4g lte system. however, even for covrage distance of 1000m, around 50 percent perormance gain can still be achieved for 5g massive beamforming over 4g lte system. in addition, as the foliage loss increases with higher carrier freuency, the performance of 5g beamforming shows higher dependency to the season. as a conequence, a larger difference of throughput can be observed with the increase of coverage distance in summer and winter for 5g beamforming. future research directions of beam space multiplexing in 6g and beyond with the great efforts of global researchers in acaemia and industry, 5g is at our fingertips. since 2019, several countries and cities have started to deploy commercial 5g cellular networks. therein, massive mimo, one of the key technologies in 5g, is now mature. the key ingredients of masive mimo have been standardized in rel 15 . it is, therefore, time for mimo researchers to change focus toward future research directions of beam space multiplexing in 6g and beyond. 6g will go beyond mobile internet and will be required to support ubiquitous artificial intellience (ai) services from the core to the end devices of the network . to this end, we outine four emerging beam space multiplexing relatd research directions to fulfill the requirements for expected services in 6g and beyond: massive beamforming for xl mimo and leo satellites communication, data driven intelligent massive beamforming, and multi target spatial signal pro massive beamforming for xl mimo: as a straightforward evolution result of massive beamorming, the extremely large number of antenas with enhanced spatial signal processing (i.e., massive beamforming) will be a forward looking research direction. we can expect a near future where hundreds or thousands of antennas are used to serve very many users, for example, mtc devics. in general, there are three types of ways to crete xl mimo. • extremely large aperture arrays (elaa): extremely large arrays of classic antennas disributed over a substantially larger area, typically embedded in the window or ceiling of a building of large dimension.

large intelligent surface (lis): a limited surface area consists of uncountable infinite number of antennas. a possible implementation is with tightly coupled array of discrete active antennas or nearly passive reflecting elements but possibly other ways, that is, meta surfaces.

cell free xl mimo: hundreds or thousands of distributed bs antennas at distant geographical locations that are jointly and coherently serving many distributed users. in xl mimo systems, super spatial resolution and favorable propagation are expected to enable incredibly low transmit powers and unprecedentd spatial multiplexing capabilities. it can provide orders of magnitude higher area throughput comared to the current massive mimo with cenralized compact antennas, which can practically deliver. however, xl mimo is still in its original state, there are several challenging problems when employing beam space multiplexing. first, large array aperture extended near field radium such that signals coming from widely different directions canot be separated. therefore, the principal problem in elaa is to set up interference rejecting precodng/combining schemes, such as zero forcing (zf) and minimum mean square error (mmse) beamorming, in a distributed or hierarchical way. furtherore, beam squint effect occurs with an extremely large number of antenna at the bs, which means that different frequency would have different beam direction, that is, frequency selective beamforming . besides, due to non stationary spatial channel properties in elaa, the design of dynamic beamorming schemes is indispensable. the impact of spatial non stationary characterized by visibility regions where the channel energy is significant on the portion of the xl array. the performance of beam space multiplexing schemes for the downink multi user needs further investigations. further research on channel modeling, system level perforance evaluation as well as practical implementaion for elaa are also highly required.

massive beamforming for leo satellite communication: leo satellite communication is another emerging research area in wireless mobile communication. with hundreds or thousands of satellites located at dozens of orbits usually 500∼2000 kilometers above the earth, leo satellite systems can provide broadband mobile services for both wide range coverage as well as vertical applications. compared with previous geostationry earth orbit (geo) system, leo system shows advantages of much lower transmission delay and much lower path loss. therefore, an integrated satllite and terrestrial global seamless coverage can be easily formed by integrating leo satellite sysems and terrestrial cellular system beyond 5g sysems, promoting continuous extension for wireless mobile communication application.

similar to the terrestrial system, massive beamorming technology is expected to be applied in the leo system. for the service link between the terminal and the satellite, usually frequency band ku, ka or q is used. both the terminal and the satellite can use phased arrays antenna to send and receive massive beamforming for overcoming the propagation loss. however, beams need to be dynamically scheduled for higher throughput or wider coverage. furthermore, massive beamorming can also form the type of directional beam which could realize flexible communication with a particular user. the narrower beam width leads to a higher antenna gain; as a result, the se is increased. furthermore, massive beamforming allows beams that are far apart to reuse frequency, which may bring about strong inter beam interference due to the non zero side lobes. therefore, side lobe suppression technologies are required for the use of massive beamforming. in addition to massive beamforming between the terminal and the satelite, high frequency band such as mmwave and terahertz (thz) can also usually be used in the inter link between satellites to realize high speed data transmission, flexible network architecture and routing transfer applications. however, accuate and fast estimation of angle of arrival (aoa) is the key enabling technology underlying wideband multi beam leo satellite communication systems. it is vital for improving the beamforming gain and radio link quality, as well as increasing the data rate, especially in low snr regions. the use of massive beamforming in hybrid satellite terrestrial commuication for internet of things (iot) is an emergng topic, as the requirements and constraints for iot connectivity are significantly different from the broadband connections.

data driven intelligent massive beamformng: machine learning (ml) has been applied to a large variety of problems in wireless communiation networks, including network management, self organization, self healing and physical layer optimizations (see and references therein). more and more trails show that ml can improve the performance of existing model based algoithms with reduced implementation complexity. it is also opening a door for some use cases, which the characteristics of system are hard to model or analyze in a conventional way yet can be learned from data. for example, the use of deep learning (dl) can significantly improve the complexity perormance trade off of power allocation, compared to traditional optimization oriented or model based methods. for instance, dl can be used for channel estimation and beam selection in massive mimo systems. the existing work has shown that bs can find optimal beamforming vectors from a beam steering based codebook in a mmwave communiation system through deep reinforcement learning (drl). nevertheless, if the size of beamforming codebook is very large, it is impossible to find the optimal beamforming vectors by traditional modl based methods. one major potential application for joint communication and radar sensing is in vehicular networks, where signals can also be used for sensing the environment for object detection and collision avoidance. it is also very meaningful in mobile networks with other simultaneous communication serice, such as a drone's detection and position at the airport.