circularly polarized antenna with reconfigurable broadside and conical beams facilitated by a mode switchable feed network

abstract— a pattern reconfigurable slot augmented patch antenna is reported that radiates circularly polarized (cp) fields and is switchable between a broadside and a conical radiating mode. two novel design strategies were adopted to realize these advantageous performance characteristics. first, a mode switchable feed network which includes a set of eight l probes was developed that facilitates the proper excitation of either the patch's tm11 or tm21 mode and yields symmetric radiation patterns. second, their operating bands were made to overlap by augmenting this patch with an annular slot. consequently, the radiation pattern is easily switched between the broadside and the conical modes within the overlapping operational bandwidths. a prototype was fabriated and tested. the measured results are in good agreement with their simulated values, verifying the design concepts. the measured operating bandwidth, 7.8% from 2.45 to 2.65 ghz, was determined from the overlap of the impedance and axial ratio bandwidths for both modes. the measured realized gain values are stable for both radiating states within this operational bandwidth, the broadside (conical) peak value being 8.5 dbic (5.8 dbic). the cp pattern reconfigurability of this antenna with its favorable performance characteristics makes it an ideal candidate for many rfid and satellite communication applications.

index terms— broadside and conical radiation patterns, circular polarzation, l probe feed network, patch antenna, pattern reconfigurable antenna.

pattern reconfigurable antennas have drawn much attention with the rapid development of modern wireless communication systems. for instance, previously reported antennas with pattern reconfiguraility can reshape their radiation patterns for many purposes. these include object detection, larger radiation coverage, and channel capacity enhancement in multi in multi out systems .

in this communication, our efforts are focused on obtaining an advantageous pattern reconfigurability, i.e., switchable circularly polarized (cp) broadside and conical beams. this reconfigurability increases the cp radiation coverage, a highly desirable, beneficial property for rfid, and satellite communications applications. for example, fig. 1 presents a satellite communications application diagram that illustrates these benefits. a conical beam cp antenna, which is mounted on the top of a vehicle moving on the earth, is quite suitable for communicating with geostationary satellites positioned at angles away from the geocentric zenith without any

manuscript received march 9, 2017; revised october 9, 2017; accepted november 11, 2017. date of publication december 18, 2017; date of current version february 1, 2018. this work was supported in part by the australian research council under grant dp160102219 and in part by the research grants council of the hong kong sar, china, under project cityu11216915. (corresponding author: wei lin.)

w. lin is with the global big data technologies centre, university of tech

nology sydney, ultimo nsw 2007, australia (e mail: wei.lin@uts.edu.au).

h. wong is with the state key laboratory of millimeter waves, department of electronic engineering, city university of hong kong, hong kong (e mail: hang.wong@cityu.edu.hk).

is with the global big data technologies centre, university of technology sydney, ultimo nsw 2007, australia, and also with the department of electrical and computer engineering, university of arizona, tucson, az 85721 usa (e mail: richard.ziolkowski@uts.edu.au). color versions of one or more of the figures in this communication are fig. 1. application diagram of a pattern reconfigurable cp antenna with broadside and conical beams mounted on a vehicle moving on the earth that is communicating with a geostationary satellite.

need for satellite tracking , . note that geostationary satellites are stationary and have a fixed geocentric zenith with respect to a specific area on the earth. assuming that a satellite has a specified the maximum elevation angle away from that geocentric zenith, radiation of a conical beam antenna mounted on an earth based object can be designed to always point at the satellite no matter how the object rotates on the earth. consequently, complicated satellite tracking can be avoided.

on the other hand, as fig. 1 also depicts, there are cases in which the satellite is located directly above the vehicle. they occur, for example, in regions near the equator of the earth, such as in singapore, region of africa. a conical beam pattern antenna is no longer useful because it opertes with a null in its broadside direction. a cp antenna that radiates primarily in its broadside direction is needed. consequently, it is clear that a cp antenna with switchable broadside and conical radiation patterns would be an excellent candidate for satellite communications all over the world. indonesia, and the large central

several efforts have achieved reconfigurable systems that radiate both broadside (unidirectional) and conical (omnidirectional) beams. the main design technique is to excite different modes on the same antenna structure, each producing a distinctive radiation pattern. these antennas are linearly polarized. to date unfortunately, all (and to the best of our knowledge), only one reported design has realized a switchable broadside and conical beam cp antenna. it has two physically separate radiating systems to achieve both beam states. its feeding network is inherently narrow band and lossy. as a consequence, it has a narrow operating bandwidth (1.6%) and produces small peak realized gain (rg) values (broadside mode: 4 dbic and conical mode: 2 dbic).

we present a pattern reconfigurable cp antenna with switchable broadside and conical beams that is a simpler structure and has much better radiation performance than the one reported in . its design and operating principles are detailed in section ii. its superior performance arises from two novel design strategies. first, an annular slot augmentation of its circular patch facilitates the presence of two modes and the overlap of their operational frequency bands. second, a mode switchable feed network was developed that controls the excitation of this slot augmented circular patch radiator. this network switches the amplitudes and phases fig. 2. the associated broadside and conical cp radiation patterns. simulated tm11 and tm21 modes excited on a circular patch and

of two sets of four l probe feed elements to properly excite the tm11 and tm21 modes of the radiator. the tm11 (tm21) mode produces the broadside (conical) cp radiation. the multiple probe system facilitates the generation of symmetric beams. two key parametric design studies are summarized in section iii. as described in section iv, a prototype was fabricated, assembled, and tested. the experimental results successfully demonstrate the design concept and are in good agreement with their simulated values.

ii. antenna design and operating principles

realizing switchable broadside and conical cp beams is based on the distinctive patterns radiated by the tm11 and tm21 modes excited on a circular patch antenna. as shown in fig. 2, different locations and phases of the excitations are required to generate these two tm modes. these behaviors guided our mode switchable feed network design. the overlap of the operational bandwidths of these modes is based on augmenting the patch with an annular ring.

the antenna consists of three main parts, as shown in fig. 3. the key design parameters are listed in table i. from its perspective view in fig. 3(a), the antenna configuration consists of three cirular dielectric substrate disks. they are labeled: substrate_patch, substrate_feeding, and substrate_dc from the top to the bottom, respectively. the dielectric substrate is from wangling ltd and has a relative permittivity of 2.65, loss tangent of 0.001, and 1 mm thickness. the four plastic screws shown are used to mechanically support for the three substrates. the top of the substrate_patch layer is the circular patch radiator. it has an annular slot etched in it.

the middle layer, substrate_feeding, shown in fig. 3(b) contains the reconfigurable feed network. it consists of an output switchble network connected with l shaped feed probes. there are one input (feed port) and four output ports. this network includes three wilkinson power dividers. microstrip lines are included and p i n diodes are integrated into them to achieve the reconfigurability, i.e., the switching between the different phases and locations of the excitations of the patch radiator. in addition, six l shaped probes, p#1 to p#6, are connected to the output ports of the feed network as those excitations of the patch. consequently, four l probes are excited for each mode. two additional suspended l probes are also arranged in the configuration to ensure a symmetrical structure and, consequently, good cp radiation in both modes. there are rf chokes present to isolate the rf signal and prevent it from floating into the dc biasing lines. a 3 d printed fixture is attached on the top surface of the substrate_feeding layer to secure the eight l shaped probes. is placed below the substrate_feeding layer with a vertical gap of 1 mm. the dielectric fig. 3. antenna configuration. (a) perspective view. (b) top view of the feed network without patch. (c) bottom view.

material of this substrate is fr 4; it has a relative permittivity of 4.4 and a 1 mm thickness. the dc biasing lines that are needed to provide the dc voltages to the diodes are printed on its bottom side along with four biasing pads. these four pads are labeled as dc_conical, dc_broadside, dc_ground#1, and dc_ground#2, as shown in fig. 3(c). note that a small region of the substrate_dc layer is removed and filled with a 50 (cid:2) sma connector to give the source access to the feed network. the biasing connections from the bottom to the top layer are illustrated and detailed in the subplot given in fig. 3(c).

b. annular slot in the circular patch facilitates the overlap of the resonant frequencies of tm11 and tm21 modes

the slot augmented patch design strategy is another key factor in the realization of the desired reconfigurable broadside and conical cp radiation behaviors. as discussed in , is well known that the resonance frequencies of the tm11 and tm21 modes of a traditional circular patch are different. the theoretical ratio of resonant frequencies of the fundamental mode tm11 and its higher it fig. 4. simulated current distributions on three different patch antenna structures and the corresponding lhcp and rhcp gain patterns when the tm11 mode is excited at 2.5 ghz.

order tm21 mode is 1.84/3.05 = 0.6. however, if a thin annular slot is etched into the circular patch, the resonance frequency of the tm11 mode increases while that of the tm21 mode remains unchanged. consequently, the bandwidth of the tm11 mode can be made to overlap with the tm21 mode; hence, the slot augmented patch radiator will support the operation of both modes within the same frequency interval. to illustrate this point, the simulated current distributions on the patch radiator when their tm11 and tm21 modes are excited at 2.5 ghz for several different antenna configurations are shown, respectively, in figs. 4 and 5. these designs include a circular patch with and without the annular slot, and a smaller patch that is concentric with its surrounding slot.

the phases and locations of the excitations of the tm21 mode in fig. 5 are the same as those shown in the bottom left subplot of fig. 2. the simulated current distribution on the large patch without an annular slot indicates that the tm21 mode is well excited. the radius of this circular patch is 44 mm, i.e., 0.37 λ0 at 2.5 ghz, λ0 being the associated free space wavelength. on the other hand, if a 0.5 mm wide, 19.5 mm radius annular slot is etched in the patch about its center, a similar current distribution for the tm21 mode results. the corresponding left hand cp (lhcp) and right hand cp (rhcp) gain patterns are also given in fig. 4. they clearly indicate that both of these patch antennas produce equivalently strong lhcp radiation with a conical gain pattern and, in particular, that a thin annular slot on a circular patch will not affect the resonance frequency of the tm21 mode. in contrast, the tm21 mode is not supported well by the smaller 19.5 mm radius patch at the same frequency, resulting in a poor lhcp gain pattern. fig. 6. arrangement of the diodes and their dc biases.

in contrast, fig. 4 shows the same simulation results when these antennas are excited at 2.5 ghz with the tm11 mode arrangement shown in the upper left subplot of fig. 2. the resonance frequency of the tm11 mode is much lower than 2.5 ghz. consequently, one immediately observes that the tm11 mode is not excited well on the large patch without a slot being present. the corresponding broadside gain pattern is also poorly developed. however, when the annular slot is etched into the radiating patch, the tm11 mode current distribution appears on it and the broadside gain pattern is well developed at 2.5 ghz. the smaller patch case also shows a similar outcome. these results demonstrate that the slotted patch antenna as an entity can support both the tm11 and tm21 modes in the same frequency interval. this feature is distinctly different from the system in which employs two separate radiators with individual vertical probe excitations for each mode to achieve its reconfigurability.

to switch between the proper excitations of both the tm11 and tm21 modes, p i n diodes were introduced between the transmission lines of the 1 to 4 wilkinson power divider feed network. note that the choice of four excitations for the slot augmented circular patch radiator rather than just two is critical for this design. the radiation patterns of both modes will become asymmetrical and the cross polarization levels will increase noticeably if only two excitations are employed. fig. 6 shows the arrangement of these p i n diodes. by controlling their on/off status, different locations and phases of the four excitations are realized. each feed combination corresponds to a particular mode excitation. fig. 7. current distributions on the reconfigurable feed network when the l probes are exciting the tm11 and tm21 modes.

the p i n diodes bar50 02l with 0403 surface mount packaging from infineon technologies were selected. they have excellent switching performance around 2.5 ghz. the measured characterstics and equivalent circuit model were reported previously . to control the diode states, four dc bias voltages are needed. they are labeled as dc_broadside, dc_conical, dc_ground#1, and dc_ground#2. the total dc power consumption of each p i n diode is 12 mw, i.e., pdc = i 2 r = (100 ma)2 × 1.2 (cid:2) as calculated from its datasheet . the detailed connections of these dc biases are presented in both figs. 3(c) and 6.

from the bottom layer substrate_dc, six metallic vias connect the bottom dc lines and the biasing pads on the upper layer of the feed network through inductors, which act as rf chokes. the murata inductors type: lqw18an56nj00 with 0603 packaging were selected. a complete characterization of these inductors is found in . the dc bias configurations control the excitation of the patch modes. the two small patches connected with the l probes p#1 and p#4 and the diodes are biased with dc_broadside. similarly, the two small patches connected with the l probes p#2 and p#5 and the diodes are biased with dc_conical. the half wavelength delay line is biased with dc_ground#1. the last small patch is biased with dc_ground#2.

if a 3 v dc voltage is applied to dc_broadside with this arrangement and dc_ground#1 is set to ground with 0 v, all the blue diodes will be turned on and all red diodes will be off. as a result, the tm11 mode will be excited. the l probes p#1, p#3, p#4, and p#6 are excited with a clockwise sequential phase delay, generating the broadside cp radiation pattern, as indicated in table ii. the current magnitudes of the two unfed l probes and the two suspended l probes are much lower than those on the feed probes. the current distributions on the feed network realized in this manner are shown in fig. 7. on the other hand, if a 3 v dc voltage is applied to dc_conical and dc_ground#2 is set to ground with 0 v, all the red diodes will be turned on and the blue diodes will be off. as a result, the tm21 mode will be excited. the l probes p#2, p#3, p#5, and p#6 are excited with the phases: 90°, 0°, 90°, and 0°, respectively, generating the conical cp radiation patterns, as indicated in table ii. again, the current magnitudes of the two unfed l probes and the two suspended l probes are much lower than those on the feed probes. the current distributions on the feed network realized in this manner are shown in fig. 7. radiation patterns for ϕ = 0° at 2.5 ghz when the (a) tm11

fig. 8. (broadside) and (b) tm21 modes (conical) are excited.

iii. key design considerations

as demonstrated, reconfigurable broadside and conical cp radiaion patterns are realized by adopting the reported design strategies. to obtain the optimized radiation performance, two key issues were identified. they are the: (a) width of the annular slot and (b) effects of the two suspended l probes.

in the circular patch signifiantly affects the radiation patterns for both modes. referring to figs. 4 and 5, we consider two extreme cases: an infinitely thin slot and a very wide slot. if the slot in the patch is infinitely thin, the net result is basically equivalent to the whole patch without any slot. as discussed previously, when the whole patch is present, the tm21 mode is well excited, but the tm11 mode is not at the desired operating frequency. the radiation patterns in broadside mode for different slot widths confirm this conclusion, as shown in fig. 8(a). if the slot width is very thin, 0.1 mm, the peak of the co pol lhcp gain is tiny because the tm11 mode is only weakly excited. however, when the width increases from 0.1 to 1.5 mm, the co pol gain rapidly increases corresponding to the fact that the tm11 mode becomes increasingly more excited. on the other hand, the effect of the slot width on the tm21 mode behavior is different. as seen in fig. 8(b), when the slot width increases from 0.1 to 1.5 mm, the resulting conical patterns become more asymmetrical. the 1.5 mm slot width causes a 2 db difference in the pattern. this outcome occurs because the large slot will deteriorate the tm21 mode current distribution. consequently, there is a tradeoff when optimizing the responses from the two modes. to achieve a good balance, the annular slot width was chosen to be 0.5 mm in the final design. the width of the annular slot

the second major design consideration was the use of the two suspended l probes. although they are not excited for either the tm11 or the tm21 modes, the two suspended l probes are arranged to maintain the symmetry of the structure and, hence, to achieve good cp radiation performance. fig. 9 compares the simulated axial ratio (ar) bandwidth with and without the presence of the two suspended l probes. without these passive l probes, even the best ar values, which occur for ϕ = 135° at θ = 35° across the operational frequency band, are larger than 3 db. therefore, the two suspended l probes are truly indispensable in this design.

iv. measured results

the components of the optimized design were fabricated and assembled. the resulting prototype reconfigurable cp antenna is shown in fig. 10. the l probes feed and dc biases are indicated in the photographs. the four plastic posts that were used to mechanically support the three substrate boards are apparent. the 3 d printed l probe support fixture that anchors the eight l probes is clearly displayed. the box containing the two 1.5 v aaa batteries that were used to provide the voltage for dc biasing is also apparent. fig. 9. comparison of the simulated ar bandwidths with and without the presence of the two suspended l probes.

fig. 10. photographs of the fabricated prototype of the optimized reconfigrable cp antenna design.

in the photograph, the dc_conical and dc_ground#2 are biased at 3 and 0 v, respectively. as the result, the conical cp radiation pattern is generated from the displayed configuration. simply changing the two dc connectors switches the pattern.

the radiation patterns of the prototype were measured in a satimo starlab near field measurement system. the reflection coefcients were measured with a keysight vector network analyzer. a comparison of the measured and simulated reflection coefficients is shown in fig. 11. the measured overlap of the bandwidths associated with both modes is from 2.2 to 2.9 ghz, in good agreement with its simulated value. it should be noted that the measured frequency band moved a bit to higher frequencies than predicted. this is mainly due to the fabrication tolerances, uncertainties in the characteristics of the pcb materials, and discrepancies in the actual device values of the p i n diodes. fig. 13. measured and simulated rg patterns for both the broadside and conical modes at 2.5 ghz. (a) ϕ = 0° plane. (b) ϕ = 90° plane.

fig. 12 presents the measured ar bandwidth for both modes of operation. the overlapping ar bandwidth for both of them is 7.8% from 2.45 to 2.65 ghz. the elevation angle θ = 35° is chosen for this determination since this is the angle at which the maximum co pol gain occurs. the measured ar bandwidth for the conical mode is confined to be within the two curves: ϕ = 270° and 315°. the ar values within the bandwidth in the other vertical planes are lower than the two presented planes. it is also observed that the measured ar bandwidth has moved to higher frequencies, which is consistent with the reflection coefficient results.

the measured and simulated rg patterns for both the broadside and conical modes at 2.5 ghz are shown in fig. 13. the measured results agree well with their simulated values. very good switchable broadside and conical cp gain patterns were realized. the combined ar beamwidth from both modes in the ϕ = 0° and 90° planes is ±55° and ±60°, respectively. the measured results clearly show that the rg pattern of the broadside cp mode can successfully cover the null in the corresponding pattern of the conical cp mode. consequently, they demonstrate that the prototype antenna is a good candidate for the satellite applications presented in fig. 1. the measured peak gain values are also given in fig. 14 as functions of the source frequency. except for a slight frequency shift, the measured peak gains agree well with their simulated values. the maximum gain