jorge r. costa, member, ieee, carlos a. fernandes, member, ieee, gaël godi, ronan sauleau, senior member, ieee, laurent le coq, and hervé legay

abstract—two new compact lens antenna configurations are presented and compared for data link communications with leo satellites at 26 ghz. these lenses match a secant type radiation pattern template in the elevation plane while having a mechanically scanned sector beam in azimuth to enhance gain as much as possible. no rotary joints or multiple feeds are required and emphasis is put also on the compactness of the proposed (cid:2) (cid:0)(cid:3). two alternative lens configurations are evalolutions (cid:0) uated numerically and experimentally: one is based on modified axial symmetric dome lens geometry, and the other one consists of a full 3 d double shell lens antenna. in contrast to current nearly omnidirectional antennas, the directivity of our lens prototypes is above 15.4 dbi. up to 4.2 db loss obtained in the prototypes can be significantly reduced by using lower loss dielectrics and matching layers, without affecting the conclusions. the numerical and experimental results are in good agreement with the radiation specifications given the compact size of the antennas.

index terms—beam shaping, compact lens antennas, constant

data link antennas used in low earth orbit (leo) satel

lites for global earth observation offer a constant flux covrage of the earth surface. ground stations are typically viewed from the satellite within a cone of 65 half angle. due to the earth curvature, the path between the ground station and the satellite, and consequently the associated attenuation, increase 65 . the antenna as the elevation angle is moving closer to eirp shall therefore compensate this loss attenuation depenence with , leading to a typical template with a wide illumiation angle , a deep inlet in the center region and a fast roll off outside the coverage area.

there are a number of antenna solutions for covering this need, ranging from electronically and mechanically steerable

manuscript received october 18, 2007; revised december 19, 2007. this work was supported in part by the ace network of excellence (activity 2.1) and in part by the cnrs and the conseil régional de bretagne, france (miniant and create/confocal projects).

j. r. costa is with the instituto de telecomunicações, ist, 1049 001 lisboa, portugal and also with the instituto superior de ciências do trabalho e da empresa, departamento de ciências e tecnologias da informação, 1649 026 lisboa, portugal (e mail: jorge.costa@lx.it.pt).

c. a. fernandes is with instituto de telecomunicações, ist, 1049 001 lisboa,

g. godi was with the institut d'electronique et de télécommunications de rennes (ietr), umr cnrs 6164, université de rennes 1, 35042 rennes, france. he is now with alten, 44262 nantes, france (e mail: ronan.sauleau@univ rennes1.fr).

r. sauleau and l. le coq are with institut d'electronique et de télécommuications de rennes (ietr), umr cnrs 6164, université de rennes 1, 35042 rennes, france (e mail: ronan.sauleau@univ rennes1.fr). antennas to passive isoflux antennas. steerable antennas offer high eirp beams which allows relaxing the power to be suplied by the amplifier modules. the main drawback of active antennas is their complexity and cost , and that of mechanially steerable antennas is the single point failure of its 2 axes mechanism scheme, which also requires a rotary joint. on the contrary, isoflux antennas can not exceed typically 4 dbi at the end of antenna coverage, and a high power amplifier shall be used. existing antennas are based on reflector assemblies, typcally with fixed omnidirectional beam, so with low directivity , or combined with multiple feeds for sector coverage . these structures are bulky, with diameter and height larger . known solutions based on dome lenses target wide than 10 angle pencil beam scanning rather than sec shaped beams and , and are typihese structures are also larger than 10 cally combined with complex feeding arrays.

data transmission systems are currently implemented in the highest majority in x band (typically between 8025 and 8350 mhz). in order to avoid the congestion of this band, new data transmission systems are being defined in ka band, where a band is reserved for such applications. as lens antennas are good candidates at millimeter waves , the present paper intends to explore and compare alternative lens configurations candidate for such missions. the main challenge is to find lens solutions that offer the best tradeoff between the following siultaneous requirements:

a) shaped sec type elevation beam with the highest possible

b) very compact antenna solution (diameter

and , to cope with mass and volume restric

c) compatibility with mechanical azimuth scanning of the shaped beam without needing multiple feeds or any roary joints, ensuring uncomplicated assembly and reliable operation.

the feasibility of designing small shaped lenses with pencil beams has been investigated numerically in a prior work . in contrast to , and prior lens works which focused on validation of the numerical tools, the emphasis of this paper is clearly on the development and assessment of a new lens anenna concept that excels previous antenna solutions for this apn diameter) has imlication. the very small lens size plications on gain template compliance , since a good diameter lens . one match usually requires at least a 20 of the major objectives of the current paper is thus to evaluate how close a sec type of radiation pattern can be approached with the new small lightweight lens configurations. indicative target specifications are given in table i. fig. 1. general geometry of the proposed antennas: (a) modified axial symetric shaped dome lens (l1); (b) full 3 d lens (l2).

design and performance are presented in sections iii and iv repectively. in both cases, numerical and experimental results are given and discussed. conclusions are finally drawn in section v.

the proposed new antenna configurations consist either of a modified axial symmetric shaped dome lens [see fig. 1(a)] or of a full 3 d lens formed by two shells of different dielectric mateials [fig. 1(b)]. throughout this work, these lenses are referred to as l1 and l2, respectively.

in l1 lens design, the inner shell is actually a spherical air cavity that is displaced radially together with the feed by disance with respect to the axis of the otherwise axial symetric outer shell. the asymmetry introduced by the feed poition produces an adequate directive shaped beam as shown in section iii. this is a very simple and light solution where the feed is fixed and the lens rotates about the aa' axis to provide the necessary beam scanning. the feed is not in physical conact with the lens, thus avoiding the need for fault prone rotary joints in long continuous usage.

in the l2 lens, a double material (double shell) configuration is used. this ensures a better control of the azimuth beamwidth favoring an increased gain and improved power transmission across the lens interfaces . in this case, the feed is centered with the lens. although it is fixed at the lens base in the preented study, an air cavity can also be used to allow mechanical revolving of the lens about the aa' axis for azimuth beam scan without needing a solidary feed. figuration can be easily adjusted to other feeds like waveguides. either circularly polarized (cp) feeds or linearly polarized (lp) feeds are used ahead, depending on the lens configuration.

the lens shape is calculated from geometrical optics (go) and, in the 3 d case, it is further optimized using genetic alorithms (ga) coupled with geometrical optics/physical optics (go/po) method of analysis , . two antenna prototypes were fabricated and experimentally tested providing satisfactory results.

macor and rexolite materials are used for the lens prototypes. although these materials are not space qualified and the first one presents moderately high losses, they have been selected to prove the concepts. re design of the presented lens configuraions for other dielectric materials is straightforward.

iii. off axis fed axial symmetric dome lens

the modified axial symmetric dome lens (l1) is designed to produce a sector beam with a secant type elevation pattern. the proposed concept is the following: the lens combined with a cp feed allows mechanical scanning of the beam by rotating (by 360 ) just the lens above the feed, while maintaining the feed at a fixed position. a 10 mm radius spherical air cavity at the lens base, concentric with the feed phase center, avoids contact between the feed and the lens while it rotates. this concept was pre evaluated only by simulation in , using a lp feed.

the main characteristics of the required cp feed and of the developed lens are given in section iii a. experimental results are discussed in section iii b.

the lens feed is a diagonally probe fed rectangular patch anenna with 3.22 mm 3.48 mm dimensions manufactured using a 10 mils thick rogers duroid 5880 substrate. the patch prouces a right hand circular polarization (rhcp) far field radiaion pattern (in air)

an axial symmetrical lens can provide the required shaped sector beam solution by appropriately displacing the feed away from the lens axis . the design of such a lens involves three steps, as explained hereafter.

in the first step, an axial symmetric homogeneous lens with on axis feed (centered with aa' axis) is designed using go formulation [see fig. 2(a)]. a closed form analytical expresion can be derived for the lens surface profile complying with output power elevation function , which contains the sec very loose gain template from table i. the dielectric material ). since used for this lens is macor this is a completely axial symmetrical lens, the horizontal plane ray tracing is uniform [see fig. 2(b)].

in the second step, a new lens is generated by rotating the bold part of the original profile around a displaced vertical axis bb' [see fig. 2(c)]. although a smaller lens is obtained, the feed is maintained in its original position from step 1, resulting in . because the bold part of off axis feeding position profile and the feed distance are preserved, in the vertical plane containing the cc' axis, the ray tracing near the bold part of the profile is exactly the same as in the lens from step 1. this means that the elevation radiation pattern is approximately maintained in this plane. but now, in the horizontal plane, the off axis posi fig. 2. l1 lens design steps. (a), (c), and (e) correspond to lens meridional cuts along cc'. (b) top view of the (a) lens. (d) top view of the (c) lens.

fig. 3. simulated sector beam l1 lens radiation pattern computed with go/po at 26 ghz.

tion of the feed causes a refraction effect that narrows the beam in this plane [fig. 2(d)]. this increases the antenna gain when parameter is optimized to compared to the lens at step 1. the obtain a compromise between gain enhancement and stability of the shaped elevation pattern within the sectored beam. in step 3, a spherical portion of the macor material centered with the feed phase center is removed from the step 2 lens [fig. 2(e)]. because the air cavity is centered with the feed, no refraction occurs at the new inner air/macor interface and so the radiation pattern of this lens (l1) is almost the same as for step 2. it was verified that reflection at this interface does not influence significantly the required lens shape. the air cavity allows for contactless roation of the lens around the fixed feed.

after the go lens design, a po analysis was performed to obtain the actual lens performance, taking into account diffracion effects and internal reflections, which are left out by go formulation. our own dedicated lens design and optimization tool—ilash—, based on the classical (go/po) combinaion, is used for this purpose where go is implemented for evalating the field distribution over the outer lens surface, and po fig. 4. radiation performance (in polar coordinates) of the l1 lens computed with the go/po method. (a) rhcp component; (b) lhcp component.

fig. 5. off axis air dome; (b) cp probe fed patch feed with a small ground plane. (a) macor axial symmetric 50 mm diameter shaped lens (l1), with an

is used to calculate its contribution to the far field radiation patern. calculated and measured results show that, for the final lens (step 3), the desired elevation pattern remains reasonably constant within a prescribed azimuth interval, depending on the . optimization of the design above referred axis displacement mm. the final lens is 50 mm in diameter that is, led to

and 30 mm height .

the simulated lens radiation patterns in both principal planes are represented in fig. 3. as expected, the radiation pattern , cannot be as sharp as the sec given the reduced lens dimensions. although the calculated patern exceeds the analytical template used for the lens design, it matches the loose amplitude template from table i. the exess of the calculated curve over the analytical template could be anticipated from the stray rays exiting the lens near in fig. 2(e). finally, it is noted that radiation in the function in the plane fig. 6. measured reflection coefficient of the patch antenna and the l1 lens antenna.

fig. 7. measured radiation patterns of the l1 lens at 26 ghz.

plane is clearly lower than for plane, confirming that the axial symmetric l1 lens with off axis feed can in fact prouce a radiation pattern with sector characteristic.

this property is clearly highlighted in fig. 4 which shows in 3 d the simulated far field cond cross polarization compoents of the lens when using simulated cp feed radiation pat . howerns. the maximum directivity is 15.4 dbi at ever, due to macor high dissipation loss and to internal reflection losses at the two interfaces (numerically estimated to be of the order of 2.2 db and 2 db, respectively), lens gain is estimated to be around 11.2 dbi. the maximum level of the cross polarizab. the axial ratio value of the lens tion component is around the maximum radiation sector is about 3 db which, in large part, is due to the poor axial ratio of the feed. further simlations using a perfect cp feed have confirmed that the degra fig. 8. power template for the 3 d lens antenna (l2). (a) 3d template. (b) lower (dashed lines) and upper (solid lines) bounds of the template for two cut planes (cid:0)(cid:0) (cid:2) (cid:3) and (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4)(cid:3) (cid:5).

dation of the lens radiation pattern axial ratio amounts to a maxmum of 2 db. the same conclusion was obtained experimenally when testing this lens with a linearly polarized printed feed.

the lens prototype has been fabricated [fig. 5(a)] using a 3 axis milling machine. an acrylic base was glued at the bottom just for fixing the lens to the antenna support. the weight of the lens is only 103 g, excluding the feed and its mechanical supports [fig. 5(b)].

the measured input return loss of the patch is represented in fig. 6, both for free space radiation and when positioned at the lens focus at the center of the air cavity. lens reflection, especially at the spherical air/macor interface, produces a shift of the frequency response. this effect can be reduced by using a matching layer at this interface, but this was not found necessary at this point to prove the lens concept.

the experimental radiation patterns of the lens are given in fig. 7 the measured gain is 10.4 dbi, which is reasonably close to ilash simulation value (11.2 dbi).

it can be seen in fig. 7 that, around the direction of maximum

radiation db. as discussed before, this high value can be easily reduced by improving the polarization purity of the cp wave radiated by the feed. nevertheless, this result is still in agreement with the specifications given in table i. , the measured cross polarization is (a) 3 d view of the optimized l2 lens antenna. (b) cut planes (cid:0)(cid:0) (cid:2) fig. 9. (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:4)(cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:5)(cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:6)(cid:3) (cid:7) of the lens (dotted line: inner interface; solid line: outer inerface).

sired shaped sector beam complying with target specifications, while being very lightweight. it is stressed that the obtained diectivity is 15.4 dbi and, if required, the 4.2 db loss, can be sigificantly reduced by using a lower loss material and matching layers: simulations show that in this case losses reduce down to about 1 db for loss tangent in the order of 0.001.

a 3 d double shell lens antenna (l2) has been also designed for a 180 mechanically scanned sector beam coverage pattern. this geometry enables one, simultaneously, to synthesize the type power template in the elevation plane, and to enec hance the gain. the inner and outer shells are made of macor , respectively. as and rexolite previously referred, the choice of these material permittivities allows good power transfer efficiency through the lens while maintaining a compact size. single shell geometries have also been tested, using either rexolite or macor dielectrics. in the first case (rexolite lens), the radiation performance complies with the specifications, but the lens is too large (150 mm in dimeter). in the second case (macor lens), the lens diameter is only 70 mm but the high amount of internal reflections strongly degrades the quality of the radiation patterns. therefore, the lens concept adopted here combines both solutions to take profit from their respective benefits. fig. 10. co polarization components computed at 26 ghz in the planes (cid:0) (cid:2) (cid:3) (e plane) and (cid:0) (cid:2) (cid:6)(cid:3) (h plane) with the go/po method w/o internal reflections (solid line) and with fdtd (dashed line). the gray lines correspond to the power template specified in fig. 8.

one presented in and its dimensions have been determined assuming the patch radiates in the macor shell at 26 ghz (adopting the same notations as in , the dimensions of the m, patch are the following: m,

the theoretical far field radiation patterns computed with a homemade fdtd solver shows a full width half power beamwidth of about 90 in both main planes. therefore, the feed produces a good illumination of the lens surface. these amplitude and phase patterns are used as input parameters for the lens synthesis .

the design procedure consists of a global optimization using a genetic algorithm (ga) coupled to a hybrid go/po method implemented in 3 d for arbitrarily shaped multi shell lenses , . we implemented a simple ga based on binary chroosomes, tournament selection and two point crossover. the antennas generated by ga are evaluated with a cost function (fitness function) that is minimized by ga. the fitness funcion [see (1)] is calculated by summing the difference between ) calculated the magnitude of the far field , with go/po for a set of directions of observation the lower and upper limits of the and amplitude template fig. 11. radiation patterns (in polar coordinates) of the l2 lens computed at 26 ghz with the go/po method. (a) co polarization component; (b) crossolarization component.

in seven cut planes, as highlighted by the black and white lines drawn in fig. 8(a). due to the symmetry of the template and and axes, the lens shape and patterns are feed patterns along firstly optimized only in one quarter of the radiation space, and then reconstructed in 3 d.

the 3 d optimized shape of the double shell lens is shown in fig. 9(a). the corresponding lens profiles computed in four cut are given in fig. 9(b). the whole planes axes. in the and shape is then deduced by symmetry along optimization procedure, the thickness of the rexolite shell is kept constant (7 mm) and mechanical constraints are taken into account during the synthesis procedure in order to allow the final assembling of both shells.

the go/po far field patterns of the optimized lens (comuted without taking into account the influence of internal reections) are represented in fig. 10. they are in good agreeent with the specifications. further numerical studies based on fdtd computations have evidenced the presence of acceptable ripples in the lens radiation pattern (fig. 10) due to the effect of internal reflections in the lens.

the far field cond cross polarization patterns in 3 d comuted with go/po are given in fig. 11. the secant squared pattern is clearly highlighted in fig. 11(a). the maximum di . the maximum level rectivity equals 16.4 dbi for db, confirming of the cross polarization component is thereby that the double shell configuration has small depolarzation effects, as previously confirmed in section ii. in prac fig. 12. the l2 lens. (a) l2 lens antenna prototype. (b) measured reflection coefficient of

tice, possible parasitic air gaps could be present between both shells and between the feed and the patch. it is therefore imporant to anticipate their impact upon the performance of the lens. to this end, we investigated numerically their effects using the fdtd technique, assuming that they have a uniform thickness. the fdtd results have shown that their effects on the radiation performance and reflection coefficient of the lens are negligible provided their thickness is smaller than 300 m. however, the presence of an air gap between the patch and the inner shell has a significant impact on its return loss: in that case, the resnant frequency of the antenna is shifted to higher frequencies ghz and 3.1 ghz for air thickness equal to 105 m

and 315 m, respectively).

the antenna prototype has been fabricated with a 3 axis computer numerically controlled (cnc) milling machine [see fig. 12(a)]. the weight of the lens itself is equal to 80 g (this value excludes the weight of the feed). the measured input reection coefficient [fig. 12(b)] complies with the specifications given in table i. fig. 13. measured (solid line) and computed (dashed line) co polarization component of the l2 lens antenna at 26 ghz.

diffraction effects on the k type feed connector; (ii) the mechancal tolerances in the fabrication process; and (iii) the effects of internal reflections inside the lens. measured cross polarization db in both planes. the antenna gain (measured is below with the comparison method) equals 12.8 dbi. the 3.6 db diference with respect to the theoretical directivity (16.4 dbi) is mainly attributed to (i) the loss in the dielectric materials (estiated to be 0.1 db and 1.7 db in rexolite and macor, respecively), as well as (ii) the loss in the patch antenna and feed conb, as nector (roughly 1.8 db). return loss is negligible [ shown in fig. 12(b)].

similar performance has been obtained at 25.75 ghz and 26.25 ghz. these radiation characteristics are considered as very acceptable given the moderate size of the lens and the vaidity domain of go/po technique . it is also noteworthy to mention that the amplitude of the ripples observed in e plane could be reduced significantly using a small ground plane, in contrast to the one used here [fig. 12(a)].

in the present work, new lens configurations have been proosed to produce a sector beam with shaping in elevation that enable simple azimuth mechanical scanning, appropriate for leo satellite data link communications at 26 ghz. the main design challenge stems from the need to comply simultaneously with the following demanding requirements: 1) dimensions pattern ; 2) strongly shaped beam with sec less than and minimum depolarization effects; 3) enhanced gain; and 4) azimuth scanning requiring no multiple feeds or rotary joints. two different lens configurations were proposed. one is based on a new off centered shaped dome lens and the other one is based on a full 3d double shell lens. both solutions comply with specifications, with 11.2 dbi and 12.8 dbi gain, respectively. gain could be further improved by about 3 db loss tangent instead of using available dielectrics with 10 macor. this is at least 8 db higher than currently used omnidirectional solutions. lenses are low profile, with less than 103 g mass, and the configuration is appropriate for mechanical rotation about an appropriate axis for azimuth beam scanning without physical contact of the lens with the fixed feed. this characteristic alone is a marked advantage of the proposed lenses and together with the above referred characteristics makes these lenses unique for the envisaged application.

the authors acknowledge the collaboration from v. fred, c. brito, and f. blanchet for prototype construction, and a. almeida for prototype measurements. the authors are also grateful to the cnrs/idris,orsay, france, for the access to their high performance computing platforms.

s. chen, c. du toit, k. hersey, d. pao, v. karasack, j. patel, m. ramesh, c. sui, and e. ekelman, "azimuth scanning ka band phased array antenna," in proc. ieee ap s conf., boston, ma, 2001, vol. 3, pp. 808 811.

h. deguchi, h. kawahara, m. tsuji, and h. shigesawa, "rotational dielectric dome design for wide angle scanning applications," in proc. ieee ap s conf., washington, dc, 2005, vol. 3a, pp. 638 641. p. valentino, c. rothenberg, and j. stangel, "design and fabrication of homogeneous dielectric lenses for dome antenna," in proc. ieee ap s conf., 1980, vol. 18, pp. 580 583.

c. a. fernandes, shaped beam antennas, l. godara, ed. boca raton, fl: crc press, 2002, ch. 15 in handbook of antennas in wireless communications.