compact self diplexing dual band dual sense circularly polarized array antenna with closely spaced operating frequencies

chun xu mao, member, ieee, zhi hao jiang, member, ieee, douglas h. werner, fellow, ieee, steven gao, fellow, ieee, and wei hong, fellow, ieee

abstract— a novel self diplexing aperture shared dual band dual sense circularly polarized (cp) antenna array is proposed for transmit/receive (tx/rx) applications in x band satellite communication systems. the antenna is capable of receiving left handed cp low band while transmitting right handed cp (rhcp) signals in the high band. first, a dual port cavity fed linearly polarized (lp) patch antenna with high isolation is developed as the element of the array. the element is composed of a slotted patch, a u slot loaded substrate integrated cavity (sic), and two groups of split ring resonators (srrs). the lhcp and rhcp operation is achieved by employing two sequentially rotated feeding networks which are isolated by a ground plane. to reduce the mutual coupling between the radiators, narrow slots are etched out in the center of the patches. importantly, the sharing of patches at different bands (i.e., common aperture) enables a compact footprint to be achieved for the array, which is beneficial for suppressing undesirable grating lobes due to the reduced inter element spacing. the measured results of a fabricated prototype agree well with the simulations, showing an impedance bandwidth of 7.2 7.75 ghz (7.85 8.4 ghz), 3 db axial ratio (ar) bandwidth of 7.4 7.7 ghz (7.95 8.32 ghz), and gain of 14 dbic (14.2 dbic) at the low band (high band). the channel isolation is over 27 db and the side lobe levels are below 15 db in both bands. the demonstrated low profile dual band dual sense cp antenna array can be a good candidate for satellite communication.

index terms—dual band, diplexing, dual sense, circularlyolarized, shared aperture, sequentially rotated, antenna, array, satellite communication.

(satellite uture communications, autonomous cars, unmanned aerial vehicles, etc.) will demand compact multi band shared aperture

this work was supported by the national science foundation assist nanosystems erc under award eec 1160483 and natural science foundation of jiangsu province under grant bk20170687. (corresponding author: chunxu mao and zhi hao jiang).

c. mao, and d. h. werner are with the electrical engineering department, the pennsylvania state university, university park, pa 16802 usa (e mail: cxm2088@psu.edu, dhw@psu.edu).

z. h. jiang, and w. hong are with the state key laboratory of millimeter waves, school of information science and engineering, southeast university, nanjing 210096, china (e mail: zhihao.jiang@seu.edu.cn).

s. gao is with the school of engineering and digital arts, university of array antennas with dual sense circular polarization (cp) performance. compared with linearly polarized (lp) antennas, their cp counterparts have immunity to polarization mismatch between the tx/rx antennas . on the other hand, to reduce the inter channel interference of the tx/rx module, two closely the spaced frequency bands are transmitting and receiving operations. moreover, a different sense of cp, i.e. lhcp and rhcp is always employed in the two bands, respectively, to further improve the inter channel isolation. other features such as compact size, wide impedance matching and 3 db axial ratio (ar) bandwidths, high gain, and low side lobes are also highly desirable in satellite communication applications. thus far, a variety of approaches have been proposed to realize microstrip cp antennas/arrays. dual band cp antennas were achieved by exciting two stacked corner truncated patches or slots loaded patches . however, these single feed microstrip antennas suffer from limited impedance and 3 db ar bandwidths. in , broadband cp microstrip antennas were realized by stacking two slot loaded patches. but it is difficult to modify these structures for the support of dual band and dual sense cp operation. in , a dual band microstrip cp array antenna was demonstrated by interlacing different patches within the aperture. in , dual sense cp antennas were designed by serially coupling cross slots cut into a ground plane. however, this approach suffers from poor isolation between the two cp modes. dual sense cp microstrip antennas can also be achieved by feeding the patches with 90 degree hybrid couplers at the expense of an increased device footprint and limited bandwidth . in , a compact cp antenna with improved impedance and ar bandwidths was proposed that is based on the application of a dual coupling technique. moreover, the sequential rotation technique has also been widely used to design broadband microstrip antenna arrays . a dual band microstrip array antenna was implemented in by employing different patches, but which suffers from a high side lobe level. in this paper, a self diplexing microstrip array antenna capable of supporting dual band dual sense cp operation is proposed for tx/rx satellite communications in the x band. first, the concept for the antenna element is developed. the design is inspired by the dual port diplexing antenna presented in , which contains a slot loaded substrate integrated cavity typically adopted for

(sic) that is coupled to the filtering/frequency selective channels. the two ports of the element transmit/receive lp signals in two frequency bands that are closely spaced. next, a 4 element subarray is formed with orthogonal cp radiation characteristics at the two bands/ports. this is achieved by using two groups of stacked sequentially rotated feedlines, which are isolated by a ground plane. to further enhance the gain, a 4 × 4 array antenna comprised by 4 subarrays is realized. owing to the shared aperture architecture, the distance between the array elements is reduced to suppress grating lobes. moreover, the antenna exhibits a good frequency selectivity and high isolation between the two bands due to the integrated co design approach . the array antenna is prototyped and tested, and the measured results agree well the simulations, demonstrating that the antenna has broad impedance matched and 3 db ar bandwidths, high inter channel isolation, and low side lobe levels at both bands. this paper is organized as follows. section ii presents the dual port diplexing element design. section iii describes the dual cp subarray based on the sequential rotation technique. section iv presents the corresponding results, followed by the conclusions in section v. port

(b) fig. 2. (a) configuration of the substrate integrated cavity (sic), (b) simulated s11 for different values of lc2 with s = 0.75 mm and d = 0.4 mm.

ii. dual port diplexing element

a. configuration figure 1 shows the configuration of the dual port dual band diplexing microstrip antenna element. the antenna consists of a rectangular patch as the radiating element, a u shaped slot loaded substrate integrated cavity (sic) and two groups of split ring resonator (srr) based frequency selective structures. the patch is printed on the bottom layer of the upper substrate (b3), such that the substrate simultaneously serves as a radome for the antenna , as shown in fig. 1(b). it should be noted that a slim slot is cut out at the center of the patch to reduce the mutual coupling between adjacent radiating elements, which will be detailed in the next section. the sic is formed by connecting the top copper layer of the middle substrate (b2) and the bottom layer of the lower substrate (b1) through metallic via holes . the two substrates are connected together using a 0.1 mm thick bonding layer of rogers 4450b, which has a permittivity of 3.54. on the top of the cavity, a u shaped slot is cut for realizing power transmission between the sic and patch. the u slot loaded sic has the same resonant frequency as the patch. by properly adjusting the coupling between them, two resonant frequencies can be produced . the two frequency bands are then selected and respectively enhanced by two srr based resonant circuits. the two groups of srrs, the slot loaded sic, and the patch are coupled together, forming two passband channels that are very closely spaced in frequency (i.e., they have a very small frequency ratio). a ground plane with a large aperture is placed between the two bottom substrates (b1 and b2). rogers 4003c with a relative permittivity of 3.55 and a loss tangent of 0.0027 is used as the substrate. a 2 mm thick rohacell hf51 foam is used as the spacer between the middle and the upper substrates (b2 and b3). the thickness of the spacer foam was selected to realize a 2

(b) fig. 3. simulated s11 for different dimensions of the u shaped slot: (a) ls1 and (b) ls2.

proper coupling strength between the slotted cavity and the patch such that the dominant mode of the patch can be split into two operation bands at the designated frequencies. an optimization of the design was performed using the high frequency structural simulator (hfss), where the optimized geometrical parameters are listed in the caption of fig. 1.

b. u slot loaded substrate integrated cavity (sic) as observed in fig. 1, the resonant feeding structures on the bottom layer and the patch interact with each other through a slot loaded sic. to study the resonant characteristics of the sic, the patch and associated srrs are removed, as shown in fig. 2(a). the sic functions not only as a coupling path between the patch and feeds but also the reflector for the u slot resonator, which can significantly suppress the radiation in the backward direction. the resonant frequency of the sic can be calculated through the length and width of the cavity . figure 2(b) shows the simulated s11 of the slot loaded sic with different widths of the cavity, denoted as lc2. the results show that the resonant frequency of the sic shifts downward as the value of lc2 increases.

owing to the loading effects of the u shaped slot, which is equivalent to a half wavelength resonator, the resonance of the slot loaded sic can also be controlled by changing the dimensions of the slot. figure 3 shows the simulated s11 of the sic with different dimensions of the slot, denoted as ls1 and ls2. the results confirm the theoretical prediction, indicating that the resonance shifts towards the lower frequencies as ls1 and ls2 increase. in this design, the u slot loaded sic is tuned to resonate at 7.85 ghz, which is identical to the resonant frequency of the patch.

c. realization of diplexing filtering element

to realize different operating bands at the two ports, two gcpw port 1port 2patch

antenna i s21 (db)frequency (ghz) proposed

(c) fig. 4. (a) configuration of the counterpart antenna without the srrs, designated as antenna i, (b) comparison of the reflection coefficient of the two antennas, (c) comparison of the s21 of the two antennas.

groups of srr based frequency selective structures with different resonant frequencies are incorporated into the design, as shown in fig. 1(a). in order to explain the mechanism of operation, a counterpart of the proposed antenna without the srrs (see fig. 4(a)) is investigated, which we denoted as antenna i. it has two symmetrical microstrip feeds, both of which are transformed into substrate integrated waveguides (siws) via grounded coplanar waveguides (gcpws) .

figure 4(b) compares the simulated reflection coefficients of the proposed antenna element and that of antenna i. due to the structural symmetry, antenna i exhibits the same reflection coefficients at the both ports. although antenna i has not been optimized for best performance, two reflection poles at 7.5 and 8.1 ghz can be observed as a result of the coupling between the sic and patch, which forms a second order resonant structure. as compared with antenna i, the proposed antenna has an operational band ranging from 7.3 to7.6 ghz at port 1 and another band from 7.9 to 8.3 ghz at port 2. at the both bands, the antenna exhibits good frequency selectivity, which is attributed to the different resonant characteristics of the two groups of srrs. in addition, because the patch is excited at the 3

low band,p1high band, p2 straight slot in patch sequentially rotated feeds @high band 32 mmsequentially rotated feeds @low bandvertical transition between layers

(b) (c) fig. 5. (a) configuration of the dual port dual sense cp antenna subarray, (b) perspective view of the vertical transition, (c) side view of the vertical transition.

two bands by the same u slot on the sic, the antenna exhibits a consistent linear polarization at both bands. thus, the self diplexing filtering function of the element is realized. another important contribution of the srrs is to enhance the isolation between the ports/channels, as shown in fig. 4(c), yielding an improved isolation from 6 db to more than 27 db at both bands.

iii. dual cp sequentially rotated subarray

based on the proposed dual port diplexing antenna element, a dual port dual band subarray that supports lhcp and rhcp radiation is realized by rotating four antenna elements and employing two sets of sequentially rotated feeding networks to connect the four ports for the two bands, as shown in fig. 5. to maintain a compact size, the two sequentially rotated feeds are stacked and isolated by the ground plane. the low band sequentially rotated feeding circuit is placed on the top layer of the middle substrate (b2), while the high band sequentially rotated feeding circuit is located at the bottom layer of the lower substrate (b1), such that they share the same aperture. thus, vertical transitions in the form of metallic via holes are required to connect the low band outputs of the elements with the sequentially rotation feeds, as shown in fig. 5(b) and (c).

a. sequentially rotated feeding circuits since the antenna produces different circular polarizations at the two bands, the sequentially rotated feeding circuits are 4

fig. 6. configurations of the sequentially rotated feeds at different bands, (a) low band, clockwise, (b) high band anti clockwise.

(c) (d) fig. 7. simulated s parameters and phases of the sequentially rotated feeds: (a) s parameters, low band, (b) phase, low band, (c) s parameters, high band, (d) phase, high band.

designed separately, which are extracted and shown in fig. 6. here, port 1 is the input, while ports 2, 3, 4 and 5 are the four outputs. at the low band, the feed has a clockwise rotation from p1 to p5 and the transformer length is about a quarter wavelength at 7.5 ghz. at the high band, the feed has an anti clockwise rotation and the length of the transformer is about a quarter wavelength at 8.1 ghz. the two sequentially rotated feeding circuits can be viewed as two four way power dividers with a consistent phase delay. fig. 7 shows the simulated s parameters and phases of the two circuits. as can be observed, the feeds for both bands have very good impedance matching and power splitting performance over a wide bandwidth. the transmission coefficients, denoted as |s21|, |s31|, |s41|, and |s51| are consistent with each other (approximately 6 db) in the band of interest, as shown in figs. 7(a) and 7(c). as can be seen from figs. 7(b) and 7(d), the four outputs have a stable phase difference of around 90 degrees in the two bands of interest. figure 8 shows the simulated s parameters of the proposed dual band dual cp subarray using the sequential rotation technique. the subarray exhibits a |s11| < 10 db impedance bandwidth from 7.25 to 7.62 ghz at port 1 for the low band operation. at the high band, an impedance bandwidth from 7.85 to 8.35 ghz is realized at port 2. the frequency ratio of the s22 s21 s11

fig. 8. simulated s parameters of the dual band subarray.

(b) fig. 9. simulated current distribution on the patches of the subarray when patch 1 and 3 are excited: (a) original subarray without slots in the patches, (b) proposed subarray with straight slots in the patches.

two bands is smaller than 1.08. in the two bands, the isolation between the two ports is greater than 25 db, indicating a very good diplexing performance. in addition, the antenna exhibits very good frequency selectivity performance due to the resonant characteristics of the srrs.

b. decoupling mutual coupling between the radiating patches is a serious problem in array antenna design, especially for the sequentially rotated array. this is usually overcome by enlarging the distance between the elements, which, however, inevitably leads to the appearance of undesirable grating lobes. in this section, a method of reducing the mutual coupling is studied by inserting a straight narrow slot at the center of the patches. for iip1p2 iip1p2

demonstration, two radiating elements of the subarray in the face to face configuration are excited while the other two elements remain unloaded. as shown in fig. 9(a), when patch 1 and 3 of the subarray without the slots are excited, a strong reversed current is flowing on the other two patches, indicating that a strong mutual coupling is present between the patches. this unwanted mutual coupling will deteriorate the circular polarization purity and radiation pattern. when the straight slots are inserted in the patches, as shown in fig. 9(b), the current on patches 1 and 3 is unchanged, but the current on patches 2 and 4 is significantly reduced. this is because the slots modify the current paths on the patches, which separates the frequencies of the two orthogonally polarized resonant modes of the patches, thereby greatly reducing the strength of the current induced on the unexcited patches. similarly, when patches 2 and 4 are excited, the same features can be observed on patches 1 and 3. thus, a very high isolation between the patches is realized by cutting narrow slots out of the patches.

c. lhcp and rhcp because two reversed sequentially rotated feeding circuits are employed on the dual port elements, lhcp and rhcp radiation is realized at the two ports, respectively. figure 10 shows the current distribution of the subarray when ports p1 and p2 are individually excited at different frequencies. when p1 is excited at 7.5 ghz, the currents on the patches are directed along the x axis at t = 0, and rotate to the +y axis at t = t/4, where t is the period, corresponding to the lhcp (radiation direction along the +z axis). in contrast, when p2 is excited at 8.1 ghz, the currents rotate from the x axis to the y axis when t changes from 0 to t/4, indicating the condition for rhcp radiation. figure 11 shows the simulated axial ratio and realized gain of the subarray. it is observed that the antenna has a 3 db ar bandwidth of 240 mhz, ranging from 7.33 to 5

fig. 11. simulated ar and realized gains of the dual band subarray.

fig. 12. configuration of the final dual port diplexing lhcp/rhcp antenna array. l1 = 110 mm, l2 = 22.5 mm.

7.57 ghz, when p1 is excited. in the band of interest, the realized gain is about 10 dbic. when p2 is excited, the ar of the antenna is below 3 db from 7.95 to 8.25 ghz while the realized gain is around 10.5 dbic in the band. the inter channel gains (the gain at the high band when p1 is excited or the gain at the low band when p2 is excited) are significantly suppressed by over 20 db, showing a very good diplexing performance.

iv. dual band lhcp/rhcp array and results

a. 4 × 4 dual band dual sense cp array based on the proposed subarray, a larger array antenna including 16 radiating elements is conceived to enhance the gain, as shown in fig. 12. the high isolation between the radiating elements is exploited here to reduce the inter element distance and the side lobe level. in this design, the element spacing l2 is 22.5 mm, which is about a half wavelength at 7.5 ghz. the overall volume of the array is 100 mm × 100 mm × 2.9 mm. to feed the four subarrays, two conventional two way power dividers were employed for compactness. the outputs of each power divider have an electrical size difference of one wavelength, ensuring that the four subarrays are fed in phase. (a) (b) fig. 13. prototype of the final array antenna: (a) feed layer, on the bottom of b1, (b) patch layer, on the bottom of b3.

fig. 14. simulated and measured s parameters of the proposed dual port dual sense cp antenna array.

the antenna array was fabricated and the photographs of the prototype are shown in fig. 13. the high band feeding networks and the bottom of the cavity share the same layer, as shown in fig. 13(a). fig. 13(b) shows the patch array printed on the bottom layer of the upper substrate.

b. measured results and discussion

figure 14 shows the simulated and measured s parameters of the proposed dual port dual sense cp antenna array. the measured results agree well with simulation predictions, showing that the antenna has an impedance matched band from 7.18 to 7.75 ghz for operation in the low band (port 1). at port 2, the antenna has another impedance matched band extending from 7.85 to over 8.4 ghz for operation in the high band. within both bands, a very good isolation of over 27 db is achieved. the measured bandwidths are slightly wider than those of the simulations, which is attributed to the insertion losses introduced by the cables and sma connector. figure 15 shows the simulated and measured ar of the antenna array in the broadside direction when port 1 and port 2 are excited independently. when port 1 is excited, the antenna has a 3 db ar bandwidth extending from 7.4 to 7.7 ghz for operation in the low band. when port 2 is excited, another 3 db ar bandwidth ranging from 7.95 to 8.32 ghz is achieved for high band operation. the measured ar curves agree reasonably well with the simulated results.

figure 16 shows the simulated and measured antenna gains of the proposed dual port microstrip array antenna. when port 1 is excited, the antenna has a flat gain of 14.5 dbic in the band of interest. when port 2 is excited, however, a flat gain of 6

fig. 15. simulated and measured ar of the dual port dual sense cp antenna array when different ports are excited.

realized gain (dbic)frequency (ghz)

fig. 16. measured and simulated antenna gains of the proposed antenna array when port 1 and 2 are excited.

around 15 dbic is achieved for operation in the high band. the measured gains are slightly lower than the corresponding simulated results.

figure 17 displays the simulated and measured normalized the proposed dual port dual band radiation patterns of microstrip cp array antenna. the measured and simulated results agree well with each other in the angular range around the broadside direction. when port 1 is excited, the antenna produces lhcp radiation at 7.5 ghz for the low band of operation. the measured cross polarization (rhcp) level is lower than 18 db for the broadside case. the side lobes of the co polarization radiation are 16 db lower than the main lobe due to the reduced element distance. when port 2 is excited, the antenna produces the orthogonal polarization, i.e. rhcp, in the broadside direction at 8.1 ghz for the high band of operation. the cross polarization (lhcp) level is lower than 18.5 db in the broadside direction. the side lobes are lower than 15 db. at both bands, the backward radiation is lower than 27 and 20 db, respectively, which is attributed to the sic employed in the design. the minor discrepancy is caused by fabrication tolerance and measurement inaccuracy.

table i compares the proposed dual band dual sense cp microstrip array antenna with other reported microstrip dual sense cp antenna arrays found in , . this comparison mainly focuses on the frequency bands, isolation, side lobe level, and operating modes of the radiating elements. 150 100 50050100150 40 30 20 100 rhcp, measured

(b) fig. 17. measured and simulated normalized radiation patterns of the dual port antenna array: (a) 7.5 ghz, p1 is excited, (b) 8.1 ghz, p2 is excited.

table i comparison with other microstrip dual cp arrays

frequency bands isolation

side lobe level radiating element

single single single 10 db 20 db 20 db 5 db 12 db shared shared shared

dual 20 db 9 db disparate

this work dual 27 db 15 db shared

compared with the arrays in , the proposed array antenna works at two separate frequency bands. although the antenna in has two operating bands, it suffers from a high side lobe level due to the disparate radiating element layout and large inter element distance.

dual band a this self diplexing dual sense microstrip cp antenna array with a low frequency ratio (1.08) that is based on the sequential rotation technique. a slotted siw based cavity is adopted to realize the diplexing and filtering functions while reducing the backward radiation. the design principles are described in paper presents shared aperture 7

detail along with parametric studies. in addition, a new approach for improving the isolation between the radiating elements is investigated by strategically inserting slots in the patches. a 4 × 4 array antenna is prototyped and characterized to validate the concept. the results show that the array antenna has broad impedance and 3 db ar bandwidths, improved inter channel isolation, and reduced side lobe levels. the antenna design presented here is a good candidate for the tx/rx component in x band satellite communications systems.

the authors would like to thank taiwei yue and yifeng qin from the pennsylvania state university as well as yinrui yu and jun xu from southeast university for their assistance with manufacturing and measuring the prototype.

s. gao, q. luo, and f. zhu, "circularly polarized antennas," hoboken,

c. m. su, and k. l. wong, "a dual band gps microstrip antenna,"

x. b. sun, "circular slotted microstrip antenna for gps," microw.

chun xu mao (m'18) was born in hezhou, guangxi province, china. he received b.s. degree in communication engineering from the guilin university of electronic and technology, guilin, china in 2010, the m.e. degree in rf and microwave engineering from south china university of technology, guangzhou, china in 2013, and the ph.d. degree in electronic engineering from the university of kent, canterbury,

u.k. in 2018. from 2017 to 2018, dr. mao was a research fellow with the institute for communication systems (ics), 5g innovation center (5gic), university of surrey, uk. from 2018, he joined computational electromagnetics and antennas research laboratory (cearl), pennsylvania state university, usa, as a research fellow. dr. mao is the recipient of the outstanding master thesis award of guangdong province, china, in 2014. his research interests include filtering antenna integration, uwb antenna, circularly polarized antenna, satellite antenna array, synthetic aperture radar (sar) antenna, millimetre wave antenna, and wearable antenna.

zhi hao jiang (s'07 m'13) was born in nanjing, china, in 1986. he received the b.s. degree in radio engineering from southeast university, nanjing, in 2008, and the ph.d. degree in electrical engineering from the pennsylvania state university, university park, state college, pa, usa, in 2013. from 2013 to 2016, he was a the fellow post doctoral with and electromagnetics computational antennas research laboratory, department of electrical engineering, the pennsylvania state university. he is currently a professor with the state key laboratory of millimeter waves, school of information science and engineering, southeast university. dr. jiang has authored or co authored more than 50 papers in peer reviewed in conference journals, over 60 papers proceedings, as well as 8 book chapters. he has also co edited one book: electromagnetics of body area networks: antennas, propagation, and rf systems (wiley/ieee press, 2016). he 8

holds 7 granted u.s. patents and 1 granted chinese patent. he has served as the tpc co chair or a tpc member for multiple international conferences. he was a recipient of the high level innovative and entrepreneurial talent presented by jiangsu province, china, in 2017, the thousands of young talents presented by china government in 2016, the honorable mention in 2013 ieee ap s international symposium on antennas and propagation student paper contest, and the 2012 a. j. ferraro outstanding doctoral research award in electromagnetics. he serves as the associate editor of iet communications and also serves as a reviewer for more than 40 include journals. his current circuits, microwave/millimeter wave millimeter wave and systems, metamaterials.

douglas h. werner (f' 05) received the b.s., m.s., and ph.d. degrees in electrical engineering and in mathematics from the pennsylvania state university (penn state), university park, in 1983, 1985, 1989, and 1986, respectively. he holds the john l. and genevieve h. the mccain chair professorship pennsylvania state university department of electrical engineering. he is the director of the computational electromagnetics and antennas research lab (cearl) as well as a member of the communications and space sciences lab (cssl). he is also a faculty member of the materials research institute (mri) at penn state. prof. werner was presented with the 1993 applied computational electromagnetics society (aces) best paper award and was also the recipient of a 1993 international union of radio science (ursi) young scientist award. in 1994, prof. werner received the pennsylvania state university applied research laboratory outstanding publication award. he was a co author (with one of his graduate students) of a paper published the ieee transactions on antennas and propagation which received the 2006 r. w. p. king award. he received the inaugural ieee antennas and propagation society edward e. altshuler prize paper award and the harold a. wheeler applications prize paper award in 2011 and 2014 respectively. in 2018, he received the dod ordnance technology consortium (dotc) outstanding technical achievement award. he also received the 2015 aces technical achievement award. he was the recipient of a college of engineering pses outstanding research award and outstanding teaching award in march 2000 and march 2002, respectively. he was also presented with an ieee central pennsylvania section millennium medal. in march 2009, he received the pses premier research award. he is a fellow of the ieee, the iet, the osa, and the aces. he is also a senior member of the national academy of inventors (nai). prof. werner is a former associate editor of radio science, a former editor of the ieee antennas and propagation magazine, an editorial board member of scientific reports (a nature subjournal), an editorial board member for epj applied metamaterials, editor for the ieee press series on electromagnetic wave theory & applications, a member of ursi commissions b and g, eta kappa nu, tau beta pi and sigma xi. he holds 20 patents, has published over 800 technical papers and proceedings articles, and is the author of 30 book chapters with several additional chapters currently in preparation. he has published several books including frontiers in electromagnetics (piscataway, nj: ieee press, 2000), genetic algorithms in electromagnetics (hoboken, nj: wiley/ieee, 2007), transformation electromagnetics and metamaterials: fundamental principles and applications (london, uk: springer, 2014), electromagnetics of body area networks: antennas, propagation, and rf systems (hoboken, nj: wiley/ieee, 2016), and broadband metamaterials in electromagnetics: technology and applications (pan stanford publishing, 2017). he has also contributed chapters for several books including electromagnetic optimization by genetic algorithms (new york: wiley interscience, 1999), soft computing in communications (new york: springer, 2004), antenna engineering handbook (new york: mcgraw hill, 2007), frontiers in antennas: next generation design and engineering (new york: mcgraw hill, 2011), numerical methods for metamaterial design (new york: springer, 2013), computational electromagnetics (new york: springer, 2014), graphene science handbook: nanostructure and atomic arrangement (abingdon, oxfordshire, uk: crc press, 2016), handbook of antenna technologies (new york: springer, 2016), and transformation wave physics: electromagnetics, elastodynamics and thermodynamics (boca raton, fl: crc press, 2016). his computational electromagnetics (mom, fem, febi, fdtd, dgtd, cbfm, rcwa, go, gtd/utd, etc.) antenna theory and design, phased arrays (including ultra wideband arrays), microwave devices, wireles and personal communication systems (including on body networks), wearable and e textile antennas, rfid tag antennas, conformal antennas, reconfigurable antennas, frequency selective surfaces, electromagnetic wave interactions complex media, metamaterials, electromagnetic bandgap materials, zero and negative index materials, transformation optics, nanoscale electromagnetics (including nanoantennas), fractal and knot electrodynamics, (genetic optimization and algorithms, clonal selection algorithms, particle swarm, wind driven optimization, evolutionary programming schemes). research interests include

nature inspired techniques

and various other

steven shichang gao (m'01 sm'16 f'19) received in microwave engineering from shanghai university, p.r. china. he is a full professor and chair in rf and microwave engineering, and the director of graduate studies at the school of engineering and digital arts, university of kent, uk. his research covers smart antennas, phased arrays, antennas, reconfigurable mimo, antennas, satellite wideband/multiband rf/microwave/mm wave/thz mobile circuits, communications, satellite communications, uwb radars, synthetic aperture radars, iot and sensors for healthcare. he co authored/co edited three books (space antenna handbook, wiley, 2012; circularly polarized antennas, ieee wiley, 2014; low cost smart antennas, wiley, 2019), over 300 papers and 10 patents. he was a distinguished lecturer of ieee ap society, and is currently an associate editor of ieee transactions on antennas and propagation and several other ieee access, international electronics letters, iet circuits, devices and systems, etc), and the editor in chief for john wiley & sons book series on "microwave and wireless technologies". he was general chair of lapc 2013, and an invited speaker at many conferences. he is a fellow of ieee, and also a fellow of royal aeronautical society, uk, and the iet, uk. the phd

journals (radio science,

wei hong (m'92 sm'07 f'12) received the b.s. degree in radio engineering from the university of information engineering, zhengzhou, china, in 1982, and the m.s. and ph.d. degrees in radio engineering from southeast university, nanjing, china, in 1985 and 1988, respectively. in 1993 and during 1995 1998, he was a short term visiting scholar with the university of california at berkeley, berkeley, ca, usa, and with the university of california at santa cruz, santa cruz, ca, respectively. since 1988, he has 9