construction of a flexibility analysis model for flexible high throughput satellite communication systems with a digital channelizer

kazuma kaneko, student member, ieee, hiroki nishiyama, senior member, ieee, nei kato, fellow, ieee, amane miura, member, ieee, and morio toyoshima, member, ieee

abstract—recent years have seen the development of a satellite communication system called a high throughput satellite (hts) that enables large capacity communication to cope with various communication demands. current htss have a fixed allocation of communication resources and cannot flexibly change this allocation during operation. thus, effectively allocating commuication resources for communication demands with a bias is not possible. therefore, technology is being developed to add flexibility to satellite communication systems, but there is no system analysis model available to quantitatively evaluate the flexibility performance. in this study, we constructed a system analysis model to quantitatively evaluate the flexibility of a satellite communication system and used it to analyze a satellite communication system equipped with a digital channelizer.

index terms—high throughput satellite communication, digi

satellite communication systems are expected to meet the rising demand for broadband communication from increased globalization because of their vast coverage area and ability to provide communication on the sea and in air. as the world enters the age of the internet of things (iot), an enormous number of devices will be connected to each other, and satellite communication systems are expected to serve as a means of communication to such devices . the unmanned aircraft system (uas) has also attracted much attention, and various applications such as infrastructure inspection and environmenal investigation are being studied . however, a ua does not necessarily fly within the radio wave coverage of a terrestrial network. not only do the data acquired by the aircraft need to be collected, but also controlling an unmanned aerial vehicle is difficult. therefore, satellite communication systems are being considered as a means of communication with a uas. in addition, satellite communication systems have been attracting attention as communication infrastructure for developing countries, and much research is being done on networks using multiple satellites , . there are also examples of research that focused on light waves rather than

k. kaneko, h. nishiyama and n. kato are with graduate school japan. e mails: hiroki.nishiyama.1983@ieee.org,

a. miura and m. toyoshima are with wireless network research institute, national institute of information and communications technology, tokyo, japan. e mails: amane, morio@nict.go.jp radio waves to increase the capacity of satellite communicaion . these systems can also be used as a communication method in emergency situations because of their disasteresistant nature; even when large scale disasters occur on earth, satellite systems in outer space remain intact. currently, demand is increasing for large capacity communication such as high quality video transmission in order to understand a disster situation and implement an advanced disaster response, and satellite communication systems are required to meet these demands. in response to such communication demands, a satellite communication system called the high throughput satellite (hts) has been developed to further enable largeapacity communication . for htss currently in practical use, the allocation of communication resources is fixed, and they cannot efficiently allocate resources to comunication demands generated by various uses. thus, the next generation of htss need frequency flexibility so that they can flexibly assign communication resources according to biases in communication . technology for adding flexibility to a satellite is being developed. one representative example is a digital channelizer . however, there are no examples of research that has clearly defined flexibility for satellite communication and quantitatively evaluated it. in this study, we defined the flexibility required for a satellite communication system and constructed a system analysis model to evaluate it. in addition, we used the model to evaluate the flexibility of a satellite communication system with a digital channelizer.

the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. the supposed network model is explained in section ii. section iii presents the satellite communication system with the digital channelizer that was evaluated with the system analysis model. the channel assignment method is also explained in this section. then, section iv presents the mathematical analysis for the evaluation. finally, the paper is concluded in section v.

ii. supposed environment

in this section, we summarize the supposed environment. then, we describe the functions of digital channelizer in detail.

fig. 1 shows the supposed satellite communication system. the hts has multiple ka band spot beams for user links and ka band feeder links. 1

there are several gateways (gws) in this network that are connected to a terrestrial network. the network operation center (noc) manages the satellite commuication resources. that is, channels are assigned according to communication requests from user terminals. to prevent interference, the satellite allocates different frequency bandidths to adjacent spot beams. however, in order to improve the efficiency of frequency utilization, the satellite reuses the same frequency bandwidth to spot beams that are separated by a distance. when two spot beams are separated by a distance, the interference between two beams can be neglected .

we noticed a relationship between the satellite communiation type and our system analysis model. there are two types of satellite communication: star and mesh , . in star type communication, all traffic is sent to a gw, even if the communication is between spot beams. traffic, which generates a specific spot beam, and the destination, which is another spot beam, are sent to the gw through the satellite. then, the traffic is sent to the destination spot beam from the gw through the satellite. because the transponder has a simple structure that is suitable for satellite communication, a general satellite system is constructed based on star type comunication. on the other hand, traffic is sent to the other spot beam without going to the gw in mesh type communication. the satellite directly downlinks traffic from the specific spot beam to the destination beam. in mesh type communication, because the communication between beams does not use any feeder links, feeder links can be effectively utilized. although conventional satellites do not adopt mesh type communication because of mountability concerns, a digital channelizer makes it possible to simplify the transponder, so a satellite with digital channelizer can adopt mesh type communication. therefore, we constructed a system analysis model based on mesh type communication. next, we explain the assumed transponder of the satellite communication system. it is hard to process all frequency bandwidths with a digital channelizer on a satellite because of cost and mountability; the processing frequency mba (rx) port

fig. 2. block diagram of the hybrid transponder.

tens of bandwidth of an hts sometimes reaches several gigahertz. therefore, we focused on a hybrid transponder that shares a bent pipe mode and digital channelizer. fig. 2 presents a block diagram of the hybrid transponder. part of the input from the multi beam antenna (mba) is processed by the digital channelizer and output, and the remaining inputs are processed by bent pipe transmission. because the assumed transponder uses mesh type communication, the output is also made to the mba. in this research, the signal input from the antenna was input from the channelizer port to the channelizer, and the channelizer port and input from the antenna had one to one correspondence. therefore, the ratio of the signal processed by the channelizer and proportion of the bent pipe transmission were determined by the number of ports of the channelizer. when the number of input antennas and number of ports of the channelizer are equal, this means that all of the signals are processed by the channelizer. we evaluated the influence of the number of ports of the digital channelizer on the flexibility of the system.

c. function of digital channelizer

here, we summarize the three functions of the digital channelizer and explain the function focused on in this study. because bent pipe satellites cannot change the frequency bandwidth assigned to the spot beam, all spot beams are assigned a fixed frequency bandwidth. on the other hand, a digital channelizer can change the frequency bandwidth allocation between spot beams. in disaster situations, a satellite communication system with a digital channelizer can allocate a large frequency bandwidth to the spot beam covering the disaster area.

when the traffic destination is a specific gw, because a bent pipe satellite simply downlinks the traffic from the user link channel to the feeder link channel, the number of feeder link channels is the sum of the user link channels, as illustrated in fig. 3(a). when user terminals do not generate much traffic and there are many free channels on the user link, the feeder link becomes a wideband signal with many empty channels, as shown in fig. 3(a). a satellite equipped with a digital channelizer can pick up data from the user link channel at the transponder and then multiplex the data on the feeder 2

fig. 3. function of a digital channelizer for star type communication

link channel to avoid generating idle channels, as shown in fig. 3(b). thus, a satellite equipped with a digital channelizer can improve the frequency utilization efficiency of the feeder link.

fig. 4 presents an example of mesh type communication. the satellite receives user link channels from beam a and sends these channels to beams a and b. when a large amount of traffic is generated from beam a to beam b, accommodating all of it is impossible even if there are other open channels, as shown in fig. 4(a), because current bent pipe satellites define a fixed frequency bandwidth for each destination beam. on the other hand, a digital channelizer can change the frequency bandwidth allocation for each destination beam. thus, the noc can optimize the channel allocation depending on the amount of generated traffic, as shown in fig. 4(b). this study focused on this function to evaluate the improvement in flexibility.

iii. satellite communication system model

in this section, we define the satellite communication system model and note the relationship among factors composing the system. then, we introduce the channel allocation method for maximizing the traffic accommodation rate.

the frequency bandwidth allocated to downlinking of the satellite communication system is represented as bw d , and the frequency bandwidth for uplinking is represented as bw u . first, we focus on the downlink and summarize the relationship between the frequency bandwidth and channels that are allocated to downlinking. we define the frequency bandwidths for the feeder link and user link as bw fd and bw ud , respectively. because the summation of the feeder link frequency bandwidth and user link frequency bandwidth is the same as the system frequency bandwidth, these values satisfy the equation given below: from beam a transponder without channelizer

user link user link

(a) bent pipe system

adaptable f to beam a

user link user link f

the frequency bandwidth of downlinking for gw i is given by bw i

fd and is expressed as follows:

where n is the number of gws. this model considers polarized waves. hence, the satellite communication system can use the same frequency bandwidths for right hand cirular polarization (rhcp) and left hand circular polarization (lhcp). therefore, the total frequency bandwidth for the feeder links is double the allocated frequency bandwidth, as illustrated as fig. 5. in this research, we ignored the effect of polarization loss. the frequency bandwidth of downlinking for beam i is given by bw i g

ud ud and is expressed as follows: (cid:4) (cid:3)

where n is the number of repetitions of frequency. when the number of repetitions of frequency is n r , in order to prevent interference between beams, a multi beam satellite system has to allocate different frequency bandwidths for n to each other. however, the multi beam satellite system can reuse these frequency bandwidths for other beams. when n r beams that n lie next to each other consist of the same group, there are b n r groups in the system. because a multi beam satellite can reuse the same frequency bandwidth for these groups, equation (3) holds true. while the satellite system can use polarized waves in the user link and feeder link, the right side of equation (3) is doubled. the number of channels for downlinking to gw i is given by ch i b is the number of beams and n r

r beams that lie next

fd and is expressed as follows: bw i bw ch i = , fd

(4) where bw is the frequency bandwidth of the channel. the total number of channels of the feeder link for downlinking is defined as ch all fd and is expressed as follows:

similar to a feeder link, the number of channels for the user link and the frequency bandwidth that is allocated for the user link have an established relation that is expressed by equations (7) (9):

where ch i ud is the number of channels for downlinking to beam i and ch all ud represents all channels that are allocated to the user link for downlinking. because the relationship between the frequency bandwidth and channel for uplinking is the same as that for downlinking, the description is omitted. we define the number of user links that is transmitted by uc and the number of user links ub. obviously,

the digital channelizer as n that is transmitted by the bent pipe mode as n these two values satisfy equation (10) given below:

in the same manner, we define n these two values satisfy equation (11) given below:

the number of ports of the digital channelizer is given by n and is expressed as follows: the number of channels for traffic from beam i to beam j is defined as chuu ij , and we summarize all channels that are sent from beam to beam to the matrix as c

in this matrix, a row represents the source beam, and a column represents the destination beam. when a satellite receives these channels from each beam, the channels are combined in increments of a row for uplinking. the satellite reconstructs these channels in increments of a column for downlinking. hence, from the first line to the n uc th line are the source beams transmitted by the digital channelizer, and from the ) th line are the source (n beams transmitted by the bent pipe mode. similar to channels that are sent from beam to beam, channels that are sent from the gw to a beam and vice versa are defined as the matrices c + 1) th line to the (n + n

fu = uf , respectively:

chufn chuf n ,n

as a result, all channels are expressed by the following matrix:

in the above matrix, 0 represents channels for traffic from the gw to other gws relayed by the satellite. because we assumed that each gw is connected to a terrestrial network in this research, traffic from a gw to other gws by satellite does not exist. therefore, we set channels for traffic from a gw to other gws by satellite to 0. when the satellite transmits by bent pipe mode, it cannot change the number of channels allocated to each destination. if every destination is allocated 4

(16) the same number of channels, the number of channels for each destination is determined as follows:

fc when the satellite transmits with the digital channelizer, it can change the number of channels allocated to each destination beam and gw. however, although the summation of channels allocated to each destination cannot exceed the number of channels allocated to the source beam or source gw, the channels must meet the following constraints: fc )

in the case of downlinking, the satellite combines channels with the same destination into the same downlink. there are two types of combined channels: those transmitted by the digtal channelizer, and those transmitted by the bent pipe mode. the number of channels transmitted by the bent pipe mode is previously determined by equations (17), (18), (19). channels transmitted by the digital channelizer can use the remaining number of channels. the right side of equations (22) and (23) represents the number of channels excluding channels used by the bent pipe transmission. table i defines each parameter. 5

(23) as discussed in the previous subsection, we defined the satellite communication system and determined its channel model. in addition, we noted that a digital channelizer can change the number of channels under constraints. we have to consider how to determine the number of channels allocated for each source and destination. in order to determine the number of channels, we used the traffic accommodation rate as an objective function. the traffic accommodation rate t is expressed as equation (24). dij is the requested number of channels and is defined in equation (25).

the traffic accommodation rate represent the rate of chanels that the system can allocate to the demand. when this value is close to 1, this means that the system can accommoate a large amount of traffic demand. when a system can allocate the same number of channels against the demand, the traffic accommodation rate is 1. however, the system has to satisfy the constraints shown in equations (20) (23), so this value is not always 1.

in this research, a channel allocation method was adopted for the satellite communication system that maximizes the traffic accommodation rate. the number of channels allocated by the system is determined by linear programming . the constraints have already been given in equations (20) (23). to maximize the traffic accommodation rate with the requested number of channels given, this is equivalent to maximizing the number of allocated channels while satisfying the constraints, as given in equations (20) (23). in addition, to prevent the allocation of more than the number of required channels, we added the following constraints:

equations (27) (29) are conditions for preventing more chanels being allocated than requested. allocation is performed to satisfy the requirement for beam to beam, beam to gw, and gw to beam communications. in the appendix, we explain about the liner programing.

in this section, we first discuss the flexibility required by a satellite communication system and then explain the system analysis model. furthermore, we explain the results of our evaluation.

the flexibility of a communication system is defined as the system's ability to adapt to changing conditions. therefore, we have to define these conditions in order to evaluate the flexibility of the system. evaluations that include condition transition cannot be performed even if it is possible to evalate the system performance under each condition with the conventional evaluation method. by constructing a system analysis model with parameters that express the state change and system performance, it is possible to evaluate the perormance including the condition transition, i.e., flexibility evaluation. in this research, we considered two parameters to determine the conditions. to evaluate the communication system, it is necessary to evaluate the system performance under all possible conditions. this is because highly flexible systems are required to maintain high performance under any condition. therefore, the evaluation space was determined by setting upper and lower bounds for each parameter. by evaluating the system performance in the evaluation space, we evaluated the flexibility. to compare several systems, we defined an evaluation index that we called the flexibility index. the flexibility index is determined by volume integration of the system performance in the evaluation space. when the flexibility index is close to 1, this means that the system can demonstrate high performance under any condition.

a satellite communication system is required to provide communication for any communication demand. thus, we adopted the traffic accommodation rate, which is defined in equation (24), to represent the system performance. to evaluate the improvement in the flexibility, we evaluated the difference in the traffic accommodation rate compared to a bent pipe system.

b. parameter settings

to which the satellite communication system can accommodate traffic when the traffic to each destination varies. in addition, to investigate the variation in traffic and total traffic, the traffic generated by each beam and gw was defined by using the average value of the number of required channels and the range of variation. we used the average number of required channels μ by the beam and gw and the variance range δμ in the number of required channels as parameters. because it directly affects the flexibility of the satellite system, the number of required channels was used as a parameter. for each beam and gw, the number of required channels is generated from μ − δμ to μ + δμ. at this time, the dispersion of traffic is given by the range of variation and the probability of occurrence therein, and the uniform distribution gives the largest variation among the set variation range. by setting a distribution with the largest variation for the range of variation, it is possible to evaluate a system that can cope with any state. thus, we used a uniform distribution. the number of required channels is expressed as follows: in this analysis, we evaluated the extent

the upper bound of the average number of required channels is μ min. the upper bound of the variance range of the number of required channels is δμ min . then, the flexibility index is expressed by equation (26). in this analysis, we set max is 15, μ μ min is 1. other parameter settings are summarized in table ii. although it is sufficient for the satellite communication system provider to set appropriate parameters according to the purpose, these max , and the lower bound is μ

(30) values were set as an example for confirming whether the analysis model functions properly.

to evaluate the flexibility index, the total traffic accommoation rate in the evaluation space is needed. therefore, we evaluated the total traffic accommodation rate in the evaluation space. to clearly show the effect of the average number of required channels and the variance range of the number of required channels on the traffic accommodation rate clearly, we present four different cases with different values of μ and δμ. the combinations of these parameters are summarized in table iii.

figs. 6, 7 show the differences in the traffic accommodation rate for the bent pipe satellite system and satellite with a digital channelizer. fig. 6(a) represents case 1, where the variance range of the number of required channels is small. this means that the numbers of required channels for the beam and gw 4 5 1 5

can accommodate all traffic unless the number of required channels to each destination beam and gw exceeds 8. in case 1, when the average number of required channels is 7, the possible number of required channels is 6 8. this is because the variance range of the number of required channels the number of required channels does is 1. in this case, not exceed 8, so the bent pipe satellite can accommodate all traffic, and the digital channelizer does not improve the traffic accommodation rate. after the average number of required channels becomes 7, the amount of improvement in the traffic accommodation rate increases for all port numbers of the digital channelizer. then, when the average number of required channels is further increased, the amount of improvement in the traffic accommodation rate decreases. because the total number of required channels is large against the improvement in the traffic accommodation rate with the digital channelizer, the improvement in the traffic accommodation rate becomes small. we confirmed that the improvement of the traffic accommodation rate increases with the number of ports of the digital channelizer. fig. 6(b) represents case 2, where the variance range of the number of required channels is e t a r 0.15

large. the improvement in the traffic accommodation rate is greater than that of case 1. this is because the satellite system with the digital channelizer can accommodate greater traffic demand by flexible channel allocation, even if the number of required channels varies widely. similar to case 1, as the number of ports of the digital channelizer increases, the traffic accommodation rate improves. the difference in improvement of the traffic accommodation rate with an increasing port number of the digital channelizer is large compared with case 1. the peak improvement in the traffic accommodation rate is obtained when the average number of required channels is 8. in this case, the total required number of channels is close to the system capacity, and the digital channelizer is used most effectively. beyond this value, the total required number of channels is too large for both the system with a digital channelizer and the bent pipe system to accommodate. thus, the difference in improvement of the traffic accommodation rate decreases.

we now present the results of cases with a fixed average number of required channels and different values for the variance range of the number of required channels. fig. 7(a) 8

represents case 3, where the average number of required channels is 8. this case achieves the highest improvement in traffic accommodation rate as noted previously. the imrovement in the traffic accommodation rate increases with the variance range of the number of required channels as well as with the number of ports of the digital channelizer. fig. 7(b) represents case 4, where the average number of required channels is 5. in the case of μ = 5, unless the variance in the number of channels exceeds 3, the required channels for each destination beam and gw is not over 8. thus, the traffic accommodation rate does not improve up to δμ = 3. even when the variance in the number of channels in the traffic accommodation exceeds 3, rate is small compared with case 3. from these results, the improvement in the traffic accommodation rate increases with the variance range of the required number of channels. in addition, when the average required number of channels is large, the improvement in the traffic accommodation rate become large even if the variance range of the required number of channels stays the same. this is because the variance range of the number of required channels has a significant impact when the average number of required channels is close to the system capacity.

fig. 8 shows the flexibility index, which we presented in a previous subsection. in this research, the number of input antennas (i.e., the sum of the number of beams of the user link and the number of feeder links) was set to 12, so the upper limit of the number of ports of the channelizer was 12. this result shows that the flexibility index increases with the port number of the digital channelizer. in this analysis, because the system with one port for the digital channelizer has the same flexibility index as the bent pipe system, the results of the bent pipe satellite have been omitted. when the system has only one port for digital channelizer, the system is strictly limited by the part of the bent pipe mode, and there is no flexibility. we confirmed that the full channelizer satellite system improves the flexibility index by 5% compared with the bent pipe system. from the above analysis, we confirmed that the flexibility of a satellite communication system can be quantitatively evaluated with the constructed system analysis model. v. conclusion

although flexibility is strongly required for the next genration of satellite communication systems and the developent of technology for flexible utilization of communication resources is actively ongoing, a system analysis model for quantitatively evaluating flexibility has not been established. in this research, we developed a system analysis model for quanitatively evaluating the flexibility of a satellite communication system and verified the flexibility of a hybrid transponder that shares a digital channelizer and the bent pipe mode. we showed that the flexibility of hybrid satellite communication system can be quantitatively evaluated with the constructed system analysis model.

in this section, we describe the algorithm of the linear programming method used to optimize the channel allocation. we consider the following primal linear program:

equation (31) represents the objective function, and xi repreents the value to be determined, or the number of allocated channels. equation (32) represents the constraint condition. in this paper, constraints on the number of uplink channels and constraints on the number of downlink channels correspond to this equation. there are several methods for solving linear programming, but here we explain the simplex method. in the simplex method, the following equations are used to maximize the objective function:

m2 here, k is a counter representing the number of repetitions. bk(i) is the suffix of the ith basic variables obtained by the kth iteration, and n k(j) is the suffix of the jth non basic variables obtained by the kth iteration. dk is the coefficient matrix of the dictionary obtained by the kth iteration. first, these values are initialized with k as 0. mn

a. step1: optimality judgment

a suffix s is chosen such that ck

s > 0. if such a suffix does not exist, the maximization of the objective function is achieved, so the algorithm ends here. 9

(37) in order to maximize the objective function while satisfying the constraint conditions from the current basic solution, the non basic variable xn k(s) is increased as much as possible. that is, a row r satisfying equation (38) is obtained:

in the absence of r that satisfies equation (38), because the objective function is increased without an upper bound, the line programming method ca not be solved, so the algorithm is terminated. when r exists, a pivot operation centered on (r, s) is performed. dk before the pivot operation is performed as expressed by equation (39), and dk+1 after the pivot operation is expressed by equation (40). . . .

then, n k+1 and bk+1 are set as follows, and the procedure returns to step 1 with k as k + 1.

(44) by advancing the calculation like this, xi that maximizes the objective function can be obtained.

part of this work was conducted under the national project, research and development of bandwidth on demand high throughput satellite communications system, supported by the ministry of internal affairs and communications (mic), japan. references

j. a. stankovic, "research directions for the internet of things," in ieee

w. harbison and r. gupta, "long range inter band radio with the processed surrogate satellite waveform," 2014 ieee military communiations conference, oct. 2014, pp. 507 512.

c. mclain, s. panthi, m. sturza and j. hetrick, "high throughput kuand satellites for aeronautical applications," milcom 2012 2012 ieee military communications conference, 2012, pp. 1 6.