roberto piazza, student member, ieee, m. r. bhavani shankar, member, ieee, and bjorn ottersten, fellow, ieee

abstract—satellite communication is facing the urgent need of improving data rate and efficiency to compete with the quality of service offered by terrestrial communication systems. an iminent gain, achievable without the need of upgrading current satellite technology, can be obtained by exploiting multicarrier operation at the transponder and using highly efficient modulation schemes. however, on board multicarrier joint amplification of high order modulation schemes is a critical operation as it brings severe non linear distortion effects. these distortions increase as the on board high power amplifier (hpa) is operated to yield higher power efficiencies. in this work, we propose novel techniques to implement on ground predistortion that enable multicarrier transmission of highly efficient modulation schemes over satellite channels without impacting infrastructure on the downlink.

index terms—adaptive algorithm, direct estimation, intermodlation products, memory polynomials, multicarrier predistortion, nonlinear distortions, satellite communication.

t here is a strong interest in increasing the data rate over

satellite channels while reducing the cost through optiizing payload architecture and mass requirements. this has motivated the quest for spectrally efficient transmissions while sharing a single high power amplifier (hpa) among multiple carriers. on board power amplification, a key satellite opertion, is inherently non linear and leads to severe distortions when combined with higher modulation. these effects take the form of inter symbol interference (isi) and adjacent channel inerference (aci). joint amplification of multiple carriers prouces intermodulation products (imd) that excite strong aci, while the non linear characteristic of the amplifier combined with the memory effects of the channelization filters generates isi . reducing the on board amplifier power efficiency not only increases the equivalent cost per bit, but also limits the transmission rate due to a reduction in the received signal to noise ratio. moreover, when multilevel modulation schemes are used in such a multicarrier scenario, the generated distortion can

manuscript received october 25, 2013; revised march 16, 2014 and june 03, 2014; accepted september 03, 2014. date of publication september 18, 2014; date of current version october 22, 2014. the associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was dr. ruixin niu. this work was supported by afr ph.d. grant n4878123 from the fonds naional de la recherche luxembourg.

the authors are with the interdisciplinary centre for security, reliability and trust, (snt), university of luxembourg, walferdange 2721, luxembourg (e mail: roberto.piazza@uni.lu; bhavani.shankar@uni.lu; bjorn.ottersten@uni. lu).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online be so significant that the joint amplification cannot be pursued. hence multicarrier signals have to be limited to single ring modlation schemes, such as qpsk and 8psk, thereby penalizing spectral efficiency further.

in order to maximize the transponder throughput along with the hpa power efficiency, additional processing techniques have to be put in place. on board processing is usually not an economically as well as technologically convenient solution as it is not amenable for upgrades during the satellite mission lifeime (usually 15 years). this motivates on ground interference mitigation. transmitter processing techniques, known as digital predistortion (dpd), pre process the transmitted signal in order to reduce the interference at the receiver. on the other hand, receiver techniques, generally known as equalization, aim to reover the transmitted signal by mitigating interference. in most of the current satellite applications, such as tv broadcasting, the receivers are legal tv decoders and they cannot support joint processing of multiple carriers. this is due to the fact that only one carrier is usually decoded, and the complexity, as well as the cost, of receivers is also limited by the market needs. on the other hand, the multicarrier signal is uplinked at the gateway (gw) that has access to all carriers. further, a gw can sustain the added computational complexity while seamlessly integrating the multiple carrier operation. this consideration defines a satellite scenario where the multicarrier signal is predistorted at the gateway without any impact on the existing receiver architectures. thus the chosen scenario precludes the use of multiple carrier receiver architectures proposed in , . however, the seminal characterization of non linear interference detailed in , is fundamental to the current work.

the objective of the predistortion function is to reduce the level of interference, optimize the power efficiency of the on board hpa and improve the spectral efficiency . in genral, the predistorter implements the channel inverse function. the traditional look up table (lut) based predistortion has been considered in , . on the other hand, single carrier model based predistorters have been studied extensively in literature. exploiting the volterra representation of non linear channels with memory , the predistorter can itself be modlled using a volterra series . while volterra series provides for a complete representation, the large number of parameters makes it less attractive in common applications. memory polynomials (mp) is a simplification of the full volterra series that completely models a parallel hammerstein system , . in terrestrial applications, memory polynomials have become popular as effective predistortion techniques for single carrier channels, since they significantly reduce the complexity compared to the full volterra representation suffering only a minor degradation in performance , . recently pubished single carrier predistortion techniques based on linear piecewise basis functions provide lower sensitivity to estimation noise. single carrier predistortion has been applied either at the signal level or at the data/symbol level , . signal predistortion is suitable in applications where the amplifier and the predistorter are co located and aims to reduce both the received interference and the spectral leakage of the amplified signal . however, signal predistorter per se is wideband non linear processing and causes bandwidth exansion on of the predistorted signal . in satellite channels, the hpa is on board, and the tight out of band emission contraints applied on the uplinked signal preclude the application of on ground signal predistortion as such. on the other hand, data predistortion can reduce interferences to some certain extent and it does not introduce spectral regrowth on the preistorted signal . thus the use of data predistortion has the advantage of not violating the uplink regulations. notice that the downlink out of band emission constraints are satisfied by the omux filter that, according to regulations, eliminates the spectral regrowth generated by the on board hpa.

while single carrier predistortion is well explored in the litrature, multicarrier predistortion has received less attention: a dual carrier signal predistortion based on a simplified version of memory polynomials is provided in for terrestrial applicaions. multicarrier predistortion for satellite channels has been firstly addressed in where joint data predistortion based on memory polynomials is considered. using a similar approach, orthogonal bases functions for reduced complexity multicarrier predistorion have been proposed in .

key to the performance of the given predistorter model is the ability to estimate the coefficients with high fidelity . two paradigms for the estimation of dpd coefficients are explored in literature. the well known indirect estimation of the parameters leads to a post channel inverse function as predistorter , . this approach has a limited complexity but does not guarantee optimal performance with respect to the selected model . on the other hand, the direct estimation method leads to a predistorter function that resembles the channel pre inverse function and provides better performance compared to indirect methods. further, the direct method is shown to be robust to estimation noise , thereby easing the design requirements. while indirect methods have been considered for both single carrier and multicarrier scenarios , , the direct method has been considered only for single carrier scenario where the parameter estimation is performed through the well known recursive least squares (rls) and least mean squares (lms) algorithms.

in this work, we consider the direct estimation problem in the context of multicarrier satellite channels and present two novel optimization methods, namely individual and joint preistorter design, for estimation of predistorter parameters. the first method extends by designing predistorters for each of the carriers individually, while a joint optimization of the preistorter parameters across carriers is undertaken in the latter method. due to their formulation, these methods provide a comlexity performance trade off offering certain flexibility to the fig. 1. system model for a non linear satellite channel with m carriers.

system designer. building on the multicarrier volterra model derived in and the direct method estimation for single carier provided in , we design novel adaptive multicarrier data predistortion mechanisms based on the low complexity memory polynomial model. iterative algorithms are considered: rls and lms formulations for the parameter estimation have been deived and their convergence studied. numerical evaluation of the techniques indicate a superior performance and robustness to noise of the proposed direct estimation compared to existing algorithms. notation:

respectively denote vectors and matrices, denote the transposition and complex conjugation operaefers to ensemble aver and

tions, kronecker product and refers to the aging. further norm.

ii. multicarrier satellite channel with single on board hpa

a ku band broadcasting application to fixed users emloying a single geostationary (geo) satellite is considered. further, a single gw is assumed to uplink multiple carriers to the geo satellite where the composite signal will be processed by a single transponder. each carrier provides an independent service; in a typical application different carriers could be relevant to different geographical location. further, in common commercial applications such as tv broadcast, each user terminal (ut) can only decode its intended carrier.

b. system model

in fig. 1 we illustrate the overall multicarrier system model comprising a transmitting gateway, the satellite transponder and the on ground receivers. the gateway performs the preistortion function and subsequently uplinks all the carriers. let th be the modulated symbol on carrier instance. the predistorted symbol of the th instance, denoted by , is obtained by jointly processing indicates where the (two sided) memory depth and is number of carriers. notice that if predistortion is not applied (no compensation) we simply have the identity . the satellite transponder for multicarrier application includes wideband input and output multiplexing filters, namely imux and omux, and the hpa. the imux is used to eliminate out of band noise injection while omux is used to reduce out of band emission. the filter responses are extracted from , while we consider the well known saleh model for the hpa . the saleh model is characterized by the am/am and am/pm curves given by , at the th carrier at the

with fig. 2. scatter plots corresponding to single carrier (left) and multicarrier (right) signals for a five carrier noiseless non linear satellite channel with output back off

respectively. focusing on the non linear impairments excited by the multicarrier application, we consider awgn for the downlink. since ut that can only decode its intended carrier, joint processing or multiple carriers cannot be supported by the receivers. therefore, in order to target a realistic and commerially convenient scenario, in this study we do not consider any multi carrier equalization technique.

c. non linear channel distortion analysis

the aforementioned satellite channel can be modelled as a non linear system with memory leading to constellation warping, isi and aci. the effect of these impairments are deicted in fig. 2 where the noiseless scatter plot of the 16 apsk modulated symbols received on the central carrier of a three carrier system is illustrated for the case of no compensation. the corresponding effect for the single carrier channel is also shown to highlight the significant increase of interference due to aci and further motivate the need of specific countermeaures. recalling that is the modulated symbol on carrier

with these notations and considering a channel with no predisortion applied, we can express , the received symbols for the th carrier at the th sampling instance, using a general volterra discrete time model as are the th order volterra kernel coeffih instance is a selection matrix. in the complete volterra repreorresponds to an identity matrix of dimension is the (two sided) memory depth for terms. however, such a representation has redundant where

degree terms like and can be used to eliminate redundant terms generated by the kroecker products. in addition to providing a compact represenation, is used to select specific polynomial terms from the general model towards reducing the number of intermodulation products. in fact, the baseband model provided in (4) is valid only for intermodulation products that generate in band distorion . we define as the set of intermodulation frequency products that generate in band distorf degree tion to carrier and

iii. memory polynomial predistortion and channel model

in this section, we define models used for the predistortion function and the non linear channel. the channel model is decribed since it will be exploited in the estimation of the predisorter parameters.

a. predistorter model

we consider a memory polynomial model for both the predistorter function and the channel model. this model is a speial case of reduced complexity volterra implementation where only the diagonal elements of the full model are considered. as documented in , the complexity of the volterra model can be reduced by eliminating the kernel terms having negligible conribution (weight) while suffering only a minor loss in perforance. in addition, to the best of authors' knowledge, a repreentation of the intermodulation products typical of the multiarrier non linear channels exists only for polynomial basis functions, thereby motivating their use.

the predistortion function is based on a complex polynomial

function of the input symbols given by,

where lected product terms where each for each carrier set of in band product terms enumerated in the set allows us to define, is the polynomial degree and

are the se . recall that, and polynomial degree , we have a specific . this (8) as the vector comprising polynomial function evaluaions corresponding to the carrier combinations causing in band distortion. we further define,

vector with (two sided) where corresponding to degree . note that the memory depth of memory depth is implicitly used for ease of notation. finally we stack all the terms corresponding to different degrees as,

where being the (two sided) memory depth of the predistorter function relative to degree . we finally define the vector of predistorter coefficients for carrier

having defined relevant quantities, the predistorter output can now be defined similarly to as an inner product and the

between the non linear input combination vector kernel coefficients

a key aspect of the formulation is the linear dependence of , a fact that will be exploited later. the predisre then upsampled, filtered and transorted symbols mitted through the non linear channel (kindly refer to fig. 1). towards further analysis, a channel model relating to the output is needed; this is taken up next. model has the same form as the predistorter. this choice is moivated by the nature of the satellite channel where the memory effects are minor . such a simplification lowers the number of parameters, thereby simplifying the analysis and reducing the complexity of implementation. further, such a choice provides a formulation that could be easily generalized to the complete volterra model. similar to (15), we can then express the output of the channel as,

where now takes predistorted symbols,

denotes the channel coefficients and are defined similarly to in (14). with the channel model in place, we now briefly describe the estimation , which would be later used in the of the model parameters predistorter design. , as inputs and

1) estimation of channel parameters: given and

samples of respectively, . to

so that the minimization reduces to squares solution for . the least

is then straightforward, leading to,

instead of the block implementation provided in (19), an iteraive approach based on the rls is considered similarly to . such an implementation will iteratively improve the estimate and will be exploited in the sequel for the estimation of of predistorter parameters. having determined the necessary quanities, we now proceed with the central theme of estimating

c. estimation of predistortion parameters

two methodologies to estimate the predistorter parameters are prevalent in the literature. these are the indirect and direct methods , . typically predistortion design assumes a system where the receiver is capable of feeding back training data to the transmitter . in the current work, we assume the presence of a dedicated multicarrier receiver connected to the gw and relaying the requisite data for the estimation of predistortion parameters. these special receivers are operator installed and are different from the standard user terminals. indirect estimation is illustrated in fig. 3, where the post in . note here that verse is modelled as the arguments of

are now the channel outputs, . the methodology is to estimate would process the channel output function with parameters yielding, in the ideal case, the original input samples transmitted symbols . this is a standard least squares problem with a simple derivation and a low complexity implen mentation. following the steps leading to the solution of (19), we can obtain

is similar to where in (18) with . kindly note in the current work, the indirect learning architecture, as proposed originally in is not implemented. instead, similar to , we solve the post inverse ls estimation problem offline. it is important to point out that indirect estimation does not directly target the receiver error minimization defined as

. however, it relies on the argument that the channel pre and post inverses are equivalent. such an argument has been proven in for the single carrier case. the direct estimation method overcomes this discrepancy and will be discussed in the following sections.

we now discuss a different approach for the estimation of that directly targets the minimization of the interference at . while the formulation the receiver of the direct estimation is straight forward in the single carrier, the case is not so for multicarrier scenario (refer to fig. 4). we consider the following interesting formulations,

individual estimation of predistortion parameters reduces to distinct optimization processes, while joint corresponds to a global optimization process. further, minimizing each separately is not equivalent to minimizing the .

unlike the indirect approach, the direct estimation cannot be formulated as a standard least squares problem . as a conequence, it can only be implemented through iterative techiques. we now elaborate the iterative formulations for the diect estimation where the well known lms and rls are conidered with some modifications. fig. 4. pre inverse channel estimation.

fig. 5. functional scheme describing the individual direct estimation method.

b. individual predistorter design

in this section, we develop first order techniques aimed at , separately on each carrier, to its corresponding predistortion coefficients (kindly refer to fig. 5). these algorithms approximate and provide an iterative approach towards the soution. the simpler lms algorithm is presented first followed by the rls technique that yields superior performance at the cost of added complexity. minimizing the error with respect

1) lms formulation: in the standard lms algorithm, we , as the consider the instantaneous error magnitude, cost function. thus, in the pursued iterative optimization soluion, the predistorter coefficients are updated as,

in (21), the iteration index is explicitly depicted and we will continue to do so when dealing with updates of the predistorter , (21) can be apoefficients. since proximated to, (21) the iel can be analytically extracted using (16) as,

is based on where computation of the entries of the application of the partial differential rules defined in to multicarrier complex polynomial functions (kindly refer to appendix a). the gradient can be expressed using the channel differentiability and the chain rule as,

equation (27) together with (22) provides the lms step for the optimization. notice that each vector is initialized such that the resulting predistortion functions simply correspond to (no th standard basis

, we now minimize with respect to the correffects sponding the performance and will be discussed in the simulation section. as a first step towards defining the rls, we set,

similarly to , we use the weak non linearity assumption to approximate the instantaneous channel output as,

referring to appendix b and using (29), we arrive at the folowing standard formulation for (28), (31)

where the gain vector is obtained from,

notice that, we choose in section iv b1. further note that the evaluation of follows from section iv b1. and is initialized as

independent preptimization processes to be run in parallel generating . in the following section, distortion coefficients vector we pursue a completely different approach where all predistorion parameters are estimated jointly towards achieving a global optimum. the individual estimation method results in

c. joint predistorter design

is a function of the predistorted symbols input carriers as defined in (16). inuitively, this calls for a joint estimation of the predistorter co . in this section we develop first order techniques efficients with aimed to minimize the cost function respect to the predistortion coefficients of all the carriers, compactly defined here defined as, each channel output from all

in fig. 6 the scheme of the joint estimation method is illuss not a trated. as mentioned earlier, joint estimation of generalization of the individual optimization method described in section iv b. the joint estimation methodology exploits the and kernel conterdependence between channel outputs efficients . this results in an improved perforance compared to the individual estimation, but at the cost of higher complexity.

1) lms formulation: the standard lms formulation for

this problem can be written similarly to (21). with

, we use the update equation,

based on form of

described in (34), we define the dimensional column vector

as, notice the complexity increase required for the computation of terms in (36) compared to the individual lms es

are required. similarly to , we define the instantaneous equivalent

filter (ief) relative to carrier with respect to carrier

note, that unlike in (23) of section iv b1, we include here two subscripts for carrier and , respectively. further, similar to (26), we have,

are computed based on the in (38), the entries of partial differential rules defined in elaborated to the case of multicarrier complex polynomial functions (kindly refer to appendix a). each differential vector in (36) can be expressed exploiting channel differentiability and the chain rule as,

using (40) and (38) in (39), we finally obtain an expression for the gradient as, 2) rls formulation: the objective function to be minimized with respect to the overall predistortion coeffiients vector is the forgetting factor. to

proceed with the analysis, we introduce,

where is obained from (36). notice in (43), as with the joint lms formuation of section iv c1, we can identify a complexity increase with respect to the individual rls estimation in (28) where only terms is matrix and

towards defining the global rls, we set,

similarly to , we use the weak non linearity assumption

to approximate the instantaneous channel output as,

referring to appendix c, the weak non linearity approximation of (45), and using the definition in (43), we obtain for (44) a recursive solution:

this leads to the following recursive set of equations,

unlike in section iv b2, we now deal with a

gain matrix in the update equations. notice that

and is initialized as in the earlier section. nomial predistorter with respect to the known indirect approach. through extensive numerical simulations covering several scearios, we evaluate the gain obtained by the proposed approach. such an evaluation combines both power efficiency and error performance, since the two quantities are typically in conflict.

total degradation is a standard figure of merit for evaluating the performance over non linear channels , . it is defined as,

represents the energy loss between where the non linear and linear channels for a given target bit error rate (ber). obo is defined as the ratio in db between the multicarier signal output power and the saturation output power of the selected amplifier model. for the considered amplifier model we have a nominal saturation output power of 0 db. when the amplifier is operated in high efficiency region it yields strong , while in linear distortion effects increasing the needed operation we have a power efficiency degradation accounted by the measure of obo. the total degradation is illustrated as a function of the obo resulting in a convex curve whose minmum identifies the optimal amplifier operating point. notice in case of perfect comhat (49) reduces to pensation or absence of non linear interference and serves as a lower bound.

referring to fig. 1, we consider two channel scenarios with three and five equally spaced carriers, respectively. spectrally efficient modulation schemes are applied in each carrier channel. the set of channel parameters are summarized in table i. in table i, the dpd parameter estimation noise set during the estimation of corresponds to the receiver the kernel parameter for all the considered techniques. a high oversampling is needed for simulating the chain due to the spectral enlargement caused by non linearities. table ii frequancy centered imd : (a) three carrier channel in band terms, (b) five carriers channel in band terms

allows us to identify the gains obtained from better parameter estimation. in particular, the memory polynomial model defined and in (15) is used with a memory depth of three . table ii provides the freolynomial degree of three derived in quency centered intermodulation products and included in the predistorter evaluation for the three and five carriers scenarios, respectively. with the considered memory, degree and interfering carriers, it can be shown that the number of predistorter coefficients are 63 and 207 for the three and five carrier, respectively.

d. convergence performance

central to the performance of direct estimation techniques is the determination of the adaptation parameters that guarntee fast convergence. similarly to , , this is achieved by fine tuning of the adaptation parameters. in both the indiave been vidual and joint methods, the parameters tuned to provide minimal residual error. for the lms updates of , while for the rls updates de (22) and (35) we set fined in (31) and (47), we set . in figs. 7 for and 8 we show the envelope of the squared error the individual and joint techniques, respectively. the plotted enelopes relate to the central carrier in the three carriers scenario. these curves indicate that the simpler lms algorithm performs poorly compared to rls in terms of convergence performance. hence, we focus on direct estimation techniques implemented using the described rls algorithms. this result is consistent with , where the lms and rls techniques were developed for the estimation of the imd in a multicarrier scenario and the suitability of rls over lms was also illustrated. and

e. total degradation results

we evaluate td for the considered scenarios. for

equally spaced carriers, figs. 9 and 10 respectively present the td for the central and external carriers. the results for the exernal carriers are symmetric and hence only one is reported. as expected, significant degradation occurs in the central carrier due to the stronger aci. multicarrier predistortion, in general, db) with respect to a baseline provides significant gains ( scenario where no compensation applied (legend no compenation in fig. 9). direct estimation of the predistorter parameters fig. 7. direct individual method convergence: central carrier with

fig. 8. direct joint method convergence: central carrier with

provides further gain over the indirect estimation. the joint opimization method yields the best performance providing about db gain over the indirect method for the same predis

to the best of authors' knowledge, there exist no published work on multicarrier techniques for a direct comparison. a reated work, that tackles a similar scenario (same hpa model, modulation, coderate, roll off and frequency spacing) but using a multicarrier equalizer (instead of predistortion) coupled with turbo decoder can be found in . further, unlike our case, does not consider on board channelization filters (imux and omux). these dissimilarities not withstanding, we consider fig. 4 of with fig. 9 above. fig. 4 in depicts the ber db that corresponds to of the central carrier for an a total degradation of 2.75 3 db depending on the specific conguration in place. this value is very similar to those achieved by our joint predistortion solution ( fig. 9. total degradation of the central carrier in a three carrier scenario.

carrier scenario the degradation is prominent. in this very chalenging configuration, the advantage of the direct optimization methods over the indirect one is still valuable providing addiional 0.5 0.75 db of gain.

f. estimation noise sensitivity analysis

we now investigate the robustness of the proposed direct esimation methods to the estimation noise. the estimation noise is defined as the ambient noise level at the receiver during the predistorter parameter estimation. in the considered scenario, the estimation of the predistorter parameters takes place off line with the support of a dedicated user terminal in charge of proiding feedback to the transmitting gw. the noise level at the considered receiver plays a key role in the estimation accuracy of the predistorter parameter and in determining the final system performance. fig. 11. consider total degradation of the center carrier in a five carriers sceario.

fig. 12. total degradation of the left to the center carrier in a five carrier sceario.

for the three carrier scenario. this the estimation noise level result indicates that the indirect estimation is very sensitive to the noise level. on the other hand, direct estimation is robust and provides improved performance. this is consistent with the results for single carrier signal predistortion provided in . joint direct estimation is shown to guarantee the best perforance independently of the estimation noise level. this allows the system designer to employ a predistorter over a wider range of

in this section, we evaluate the sensitivity of the system performance to mismatches in scenarios: between the one preailing during the estimation of predistortion coefficients and the one when the predistortion is in operation. slight differences in the processing of the individual carriers, can arise out of the system components (cables/waveguide lengths), on ground amplifier settings, feedback delay and propagation conditions. we consider two prominent manifestations of these differences: power imbalance and timing misalignments among the carriers. fig. 13. total degradation of the leftmost carrier in a five carriers scenario.

fig. 14. three carriers: estimation noise vs interference (

sensitivity of different predistortion techniques to power imalance is assessed by forcing different carrier power levels on the down link channel during the predistorter estimation; on the other hand, the performance is evaluated with identical down link power on all carriers. in fig. 15 we depict the variation in td with power imbalance for a three carrier scenario. in paricular, the imbalance is defined as the ratio between the signal power of the external carriers (both having the identical power levels for simplicity) and the signal power of the central carrier. performance of the central carrier is sensitive to the power imalance only in the case of indirect estimation (about 20% varition) while only a minor degradation is observed in the cases of individual and joint direct estimation (kindly refer to fig. 15). the external carriers are rather robust to power imbalance for all estimation methodologies, even exhibiting minor improveents. the minor improvement in the external carriers can be related to the magnitude of the predistortion parameters of the central carrier. in fact, due to the lower signal to noise ratio (in case of power imbalance) of the central carrier during estimaion, the related predistortion parameters show a lower magniude compared to the external ones. this magnitude imbalance db). fig. 15. sensitivity of td to power imbalance of central carrier during estimaion: three carrier scenario (

in the predistortion function slightly reduces the uplink power of the central carrier, thereby lowering the corresponding aci injected onto the external carriers.

similar to the power imbalance case, we consider predistorter parameters estimation with some timing misalignment during uplink process, while performance is assessed in the case of perfect matching using the td. we considered a three carrier scenario where the two external carriers are perfectly aligned, while the central carrier has a timing misalignment defined as a . the external carriers expeercentage of the symbols time rience minor variation with respect to this misalignment while the central carrier suffers performance degradation for all conidered methodologies (kindly refer to fig. 16). joint estimaion is shown to be less sensitive to timing errors with respect to the other techniques; further direct individual estimation is more sensitive than indirect estimation. notice in this case that direct techniques show a very minor improvement in the external cariers.

direct estimation, while providing for increased perforance, requires additional complexity compared to indirect estimation. direct estimation relies on the knowledge of the channel parameters that need to be estimated in the adapation loop, while indirect estimation does not require the channel parameters. this does not increase the amount of data feedback required to the gateway but the complexity of the processing. further, individual direct estimation has a lower complexity compared to the joint one in the number of parameters computed. the complexity of individual and joint predistortion techniques can be compared considering that the number of scalar differential terms of the kind are computed at each iteration. this number is the same for fig. 16. sensitivity of td to timing misalignment of central carrier during esimation: three carrier scenario ( db).

both lms and rls implementations. for individual prearriers, we require the distortion, considering all the computation of differential terms (kindly refer to (22)). on the other hand for joint predistortion differential terms are required

this paper proposes two novel techniques for multicarrier predistorter design in a non linear satellite channel. impleented through iterative first order techniques, these estimation methods, namely individual and joint dpd, provide optimized model parameters for a memory polynomial based predistorter. the individual dpd method optimizes the predistortier coeffiients for different carriers separately, while the joint method favors a global optimization of the coefficients at the cost of increased complexity. through simulations we have shown that the direct estimation of parameters provides improved performance over the well known indirect estimation method, achieving gains that are valuable in the satellite context. direct estimation also leads to a predistorter that is robust to the level of noise present during the estimation and to channel mismatch. depending on the complexity affordable, either the joint or the individual method could serve as a promising technique for the current and future satellite missions where power and spectral efficiencies play a vital role.

appendix a partial derivates formulation

to be independent variables while differentiating a complex polynomial. based on this, we can derive some basic differentiation rules for multicarier complex polynomial functions as, as proposed in , we assume and since the entries of take the form in (8), we can exloit the aforementioned rules to generate quantities of the form

appendix b rls derivation for individual predistorter design

exploiting the diferentiability of the channel. using the the weak nonlinearity approximation of (29) and recalling

using (53) and recalling (28), (27), we can express the error as,

this simplified expression (54) can be used in (28) to transform the problem to standard rls formulation.

appendix c rls derivation for joint predistorter design

similarly to the derivation carried out in the earlier section, we use the weak non linearity approximation of (45) and realling

this simplified expression (55) can be used in (44) to transform the problem in a standard rls problem. m. schetzen, the volterra and wiener theories of nonlinear sysems. new york, ny, usa: wiley, apr. 1980 [online]. available: http://www.worldcat.org/isbn/0471044555

r. piazza, b. shankar, and b. ottersten, "non parametric data preistortion for non linear channels with memory," in proc. ieee int. conf. acoust., speech, signal process. (icassp) [online]. available: http://orbilu.uni.lu/handle/10993/4862

r. piazza et al., "multicarrier digital pre distortion/equalization techniques for non linear satellite channels," in proc. 30th aiaa int. commun. satellite syst. conf. (icssc), ottawa, canada, sep. 2012 [online]. available: http://publications.uni.lu/record/10106/files/ r. piazza, b. shankar, and b. ottersten, "data predistortion for multicarrier satellite channels using orthogonal memory polyomials," in proc. ieee int. workshop on signal process. adv. wireless commun. (spawc), jun. 2013 [online]. available: http://orilu.uni.lu/handle/10993/4861

v. j. mathews, polynomial signal processing. new york, ny, usa:

m. h. hayes, statistical digital signal processing and modeling.

roberto piazza (s'13) received the masters degree in electrical engineering and computer science from both the polytechnic of turin and the university of illinois at chicago in 2010.

he was a functional test engineer in thales alenia space from 2010 to 2011. since 2012, he has been pursuing his ph.d. at the university of luxembourg in satellite communication. his research interests inlude signal processing for satellite communication with focus on polynomial signal processing, adaptive filters, channel estimation, channel predistortion and