dense small satellite networks for modern terrestrial communication systems: benefits, infrastructure, and technologies

networks (dssn) comprising thousands of satelites as shown in fig. 1. the initial setup cost of dssn is huge; low earth orbits would also impact the expected lifetime of satellites due to ionizing effects of particles trapped in earth's magnetophere; collision avoidance would require careful orbital planning; and de orbiting of non functional satellites can also become challenging with time. nonetheless, dssns will put a huge amount of communication resources in space that could benefit various mtcs including cellular systems, iot/wsn, vehicular/drone networks, and smart infrastructure such as smart power grids.

the rest of this article is organized as follows. in the following section we discuss the potential benefits of dssn for mtcs. then we discuss important components of dssn infrastructure and describe dssn system architectures from physical and link layer aspects. following that dssn techologies and challenges are discussed. then a case study on the integration benefits of dssn in mtcs is provided. the paper is concluded in the final section.

potential dssn benefits for mtcs in this section we discuss some potential benefits of dssn for mtcs. these benefits are also depictd in fig. 2.

extending coverage the most significant benefit of dssn is its wide area coverage, which can benefit mobile users, sensors, and vehicles in remote, challenging and under developed regions. extended coverage through dssn can also benefit several smart grid applications such as remote monitoring of offhore renewable wind farms, distributed sub staions, and transmission and distribution networks. it can also provide autonomous vessel support, which cannot be easily done with today's telecom networks. a single leo satellite can approximatey cover 1 million km2 area on earth. due to the huge coverage area of each satellite, spot beam coverage and hybrid wide spot beam coverage schemes are typically employed . in a spot beam coverage scheme, each satellite provides multiple spot beams whose footprint on earth also moves along with the satellite trajectory. on the other hand, in a hybrid wide spot beam scheme, medium earth orbit (meo) 2000 km 35000 km

supporting massive devices

cellular vehicular / drone

iot / wsn smart grid

97 the end users. to save resources in terrestrial netorks, some data can also be cached in dssn . satellites in dssn also have the ability to multiast data and quickly update the cached content at multiple locations. development of effective caching strategies involving dssn are interesting research directions. the use of an information centric networking paradigm in which the content can be retrieved by its name and every network node has some cache space can also be explored for managing content caching and content delivry in such systems. however, each leo satellite has limited storage and computing capabilities, therefore limited content placement opportunities exist, which could also create strong competition among mtcs, and several interesting game theretic models may be applied to determine the price of data caching in dssn.

supporting backhaul the amount of traffic generated by users and devices is exponentially increasing. ultra dense deployment of small cells is a major technique to support huge traffic demand in 5g networks. however, data generated in the these small cells and frequent handover requests due to user mobility can put huge pressure on the backaul resources. dssn can help resolve backhaul capacity issues by providing wideband commuication links. multiple leo satellites also provide more dimensions for backhaul capacity maximizaion. backhaul capacity of dssn links can dynamcally vary depending on the satellite orbital paths and the technology used on various communi

ieee wireless communications • october 2020 leo satellites in dssn circle the earth at altiudes extending from 160km to 2000km. these satellites move at extremely fast speeds (several thousand km/ hr) and typically comlete one orbital revoution in a few hundred minutes. from any specific point on earth, a satellite is only availble for a few minutes during each revolution.

99 figure 3. sgc system architectures in various mtcs scenarios. nodes and gateways can be drastically reduced. however, creating a network in space has its own challenges due to limited on board power supply and fast orbital speeds.

dssn technologies and challenges in this section, we discuss important technologies that can help achieve dssn benefits for mtcs. diff erent technologies, associated challenges, and possible solutions are also provided in table 2. smart steerable satellite antenna designs changing distances and angles between satellites necessitate smart steerable dssn antennas. due to relatively large propagation distances, these antenas are also required to have high gain and ultraide bandwidth. moreover, due to the extremely large footprint of a satellite on earth, satellite antenas should have the capability to produce multiple independent narrow spot beams.

researchers at the university of hawaii have developed an extremely lightweight (186g) and low power null scanning retro directive antenna array for isl links. low power and low cost, multieam bull's eye antenna with multiple annular rings is also being developed for extremely small satelites. some low loss tunable materials such as liquid crystals, ferroelectric thin films, and piezoelectric materials may be used to create multi beam steerble satellite antennas . for owc links, steerable satellite antennas may be developed by including optical switching techniques such as wavelength switching (ws), time slice switching (tss), and electronic packet switching (eps), as well as their activation techniques into the design . another promising research direction could be the inclusion of reconfi gurable intelligent surface (ris) on satelites. ris can be used to passively steer the radio signals and provide additional control on the chalenging space environment. however, the integraion and cooperation with ris are not yet explored in the literature.

multiple access in dssn traditional satellite systems employ orthogonal multiple access (oma) techniques that allow devices exclusive access to different resource elements (frequency, time slot, spreading code) thereby limiting the full reuse potential of all the available resources. on the other hand, non orhogonal multiple access (noma) techniques allow the simultaneous use of a single resource element by multiple devices. with its large covrage area, leo satellites can serve a massive number of devices by employing multi beam techiques. full frequency reuse on multiple beams in multi beam satellites with the help of noma techniques can provide high data rates. however, the use of noma in satellite communication sysems is not straightforward due to huge distances between user terminals in satellite beams. thereore, user grouping, power allocation for each beam, and channel estimation for successive intererence cancellation become more challenging.

the feasibility of noma in dssn is analyzed in and the application of conventional, cogniive and cooperative noma schemes in diff erent sgc and gsc communication architectures is disussed. the application of noma in multi beam satellite systems has also been investigated in . table 2. dssn technologies, challenges, and solutions.

101 forming vectors of the dssn satellite and mtcs can also be jointly optimized for further perforance improvements. overall, the development of centralized and distributed algorithms with differnt resource availability and csi considerations in dssn remain interesting research directions.

performance improvements with dssn: a case study in this section, we illustrate the performance of energy efficiency versus the density of small cells under different network architectures, which are elaborated in the following: • dssn based mobile terrestrial networks: we adopt the high frequency band (i.e., the ka band) to communication, where user devices do not support direct communications, and each user needs the aid of ground infrastructure to access the network via the terrestrial satellite terminal (tst). this specific scenario corresponds to sgc architecture 2 as given in table 1.

traditional terrestrial heterogeneous (tth) networks: all small cells are traditionally backauled via wireless or wired links with limited capacity .

long term evolution (lte) networks: all users access small cells by the frequency division duplexing (tdd) mode operating at 1800mhz. in our simulations, we set the radius of the macro cell as 1km and each small cell consists of 10 users for all considered scenarios. for the dssn based network, the number of tst is 10 for each small cell, and the number of leo satellites is 8 for this macro cell. the heights of satellites is set as 600km. these simulation settings have been used in several existing papers on dssn. the power consumption of each user and small bs are set as 0.2w and 50w, and the maximum transmit power of each tst is 2w. the small scale fading over ka band is modeled as rician fading, and the communication bandwidth is set as 400mhz. most simulation parameters for tth and lte are set based on the 3gpp lte specifications. figure 4 shows that the energy efficiency (mbits/joule) of all considered network architecures suffers a downward trend with the increase of the density of small cells, since the increase of sum rates in this macro cell is slower than the small cell static power increase. however, the performance of dssn based networks has much better energy efficiency than that of tth and lte networks. this improvement is due to two reasons: dssn powred by solar energy consumes less earth power than the latter two networks; and dssn provides a larger backhaul capacity than tth and lte netorks, which makes more users successfully access the network, resulting in a higher sum rate. the impact of higher sum rate at lower power conumption therefore translates into a significantly higher energy efficiency for dssn.

conclusion in this article, we discussed dssn benefits for mtcs. a large number of small leo satellites with limited resources and harsh space environment make dssn design challenging. it is therefore important to understand dssn design compoents and suitable technologies to achieve the requirements of mtcs. we identified dssn tech