design of 71 76 ghz double corrugated waveguide traveling wave tube for satellite downlink

abstract— the growing interest in wireless high dataate communications at millimeter waves for both terrestrial networks and satellite communications is stimulating novel solutions to overcome the strong atmospheric attenuation. in particular, the development of high throughput satellite communication systems for internet distribution is fundaental to complementing the terrestrial networks and to cover regions not connected to terrestrial backbones, such as at sea or remote areas. ku band and ka band satellite systems are presently available. recently, the w band (71 76 ghz and 81 86 ghz) has been allocated for multigigabit transmissions, providing 5 ghz bandwidth for both uplink and downlink. however, it has been estimated that for enabling high throughput w band satellite communication systems, transmission power higher than 50 w is needed. in this paper, a 71 76 ghz double corrugated waveguide (dcw) traveling wave tube (twt) is designed as an amplifier for high data rate satellite downlink, with about 70 w output power. the dispersion characteristic of the designed dcw is experimentally validated by a cold test. the proposed twt is also a test vehicle, scaled in frequency, for a future novel 220 ghz dcw twt for terrestrial wireless networks.

index terms— double corrugated waveguide (dcw), traveling wave tube (twt),

g lobally, mobile data traffic is predicted to grow

sevenfold between 2016 and 2021, amounting to 49 exabytes per month by 2021 . such data growth already makes existing terrestrial networks insufficient for future wireess communications, requiring new architectures and soluions. high data rate satellite communications are considered a complementary solution to terrestrial networks. satellites are also used to cover regions not connected to optical fiber

manuscript received october 31, 2017; revised december 23, 2017; accepted january 4, 2018. this work was supported by epsrc under grant ep/p015883/1. the review of this paper was arranged by editor j. feng. (correspondingauthor:claudiopaoloni.)

x. li, x. huang, s. mathisen, and c. paoloni are with the engineering department, lancaster university, lancaster la1 4yw, u.k. (e mail: xiang.li@dynexsemi.com; huangxuejiao1987@gmail.com; s.mathisen@lancaster.ac.uk; c.paoloni@lancaster.ac.uk).

r. letizia is with the engineering department, lancaster university, lancaster la1 4yw, u.k, and also with the cockcroft institute, daresbury wa4 4ad, u.k. (e mail: r.letizia@lancaster.ac.uk).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available backbones such as at sea and remote areas, or to provide resilience to the terrestrial networks in extreme circumstances, such as natural disasters. to date, the satellite systems at ka band and ku band provide data rate up to 150 gbps. nevertheless, the high throughput demand makes the current provision insufficient. recently, the w band, 71 76 ghz for the downlink and 81 86 ghz for the uplink, has been allocated for multigigabit transmission . this has raised a relevant interest in high data rate satellites at w band . however, the high atmospheric attenuation due to gases, rain, and clouds is a strong obstacle for propagation, especially, when 99.99% availability is required. as a result, the estimation of the link budget to support high modulation orders suggests values of transmission power above 50 w , .

traveling wave tubes (twts) are presently the only comact devices able to provide wideband high power amplifiation with tens of watt at millimeter waves , . due to their reliability, robustness against thermal stresses and high saturated output power, twts are preferred in most airborne and space applications. conventional space twts are based on helical slow wave structures (sws), which can provide multi octave bandwidths and output powers above 100 w up to 50 60 ghz . the dimensions of a helical sws inversely scale with the operation frequency, making its fabrication and alignment extremely demanding at the increase of the frequency, if not impossible above 70 ghz. the w band is an upper limit for helical fabrication. therefore, at the increase of the frequency, different swss, suitable for fabrication by modern microfabrication techniques, are needed to build twts for enabling future constellations of highapacity w band satellites .

among these, the double corrugated waveguide (dcw) was conceived as a sws that is easy to assemble for millimeterave tubes , . it supports a pencil electron beam flowing between two rows of pillars, enclosed in a rectangular waveguide (fig. 1). the dcw is broadband, simple to build, robust, and compatible with advanced fabrication techniques including uv liga (german acronym of lithography, electrolating, and molding) process and high precision cnc milling, being cost effective and with high yield.

fabrication of a 71 76 ghz twt, using the dcw, as a downlink amplior high data rate w band satellite communications fier in this paper, the design and initial fig. 1. schematic of the dcw transverse and axial cross sections.

table i dimensions of the dcw for the 71 76 ghz twt

is presented. the design is aimed at easing manufacturing and alignment while maximizing the beam wave interaction. the twt is designed with two sections separated by a sever for avoiding self excited oscillations. about 70 w output power is obtained with more than 28 db gain in the whole frequency band. the electrical behaviour of the dcw was experimentally validated by a cold test.

this paper is organized as follows: section ii presents the design and cold analysis of the dcw sws for the 71 76 ghz twt, section iii focuses on the hot simulation of the complete two section dcw twt, and section iv reports on the fabrication and cold test results of the dcw.

ii. double corrugated waveguide design

the dcw was designed to work in the forward wave mode in the 71 76 ghz band . the electron beam specifiations are 160 μm radius and 12.3 kv beam voltage. the beam current is set to use a low cathode loading for long lifetime, compatible with satellite system specifications. the dimensions of the dcw are listed in table i. the distance g between the two rows of pillars has been optimized for the best interaction at the given beam radius. the distance of the beam from the metal walls (g/2 − r ) is fixed at 40 μm, to ensure a good alignment and the best beam transmission. a specific effort was devoted to minimize the impact of the couplers in the transition between the dcw and the input output standard wr 10 waveguide. the height b of the dcw is fixed at 1270 μm to be compatible with the height of the wr 10 flange (2540 μm × 1270 μm) and reduce the fabrication steps.

the beam wave interaction is set in the forward wave region of the first space harmonic, to obtain broadband synchronizaion at a low beam voltage. the dispersion curve of the dcw, calculated by the eigenmode solver of cst microwave studio , with superimposed 12.3 kv electron beamline, is shown fig. 2. dispersion diagram of the dcw with dimensions in table i. the beamline at 12.3 kv is superimposed in red.

fig. 3. variation of the averaged interaction impedance of the dcw as a function of beam position d.

fig. 4. averaged interaction impedance as a function of pillar section w.

in fig. 2. a very good beam wave synchronization has been obtained in the 71 76 ghz frequency band.

the vertical position d of the beam is chosen to maximize the averaged interaction impedance on the circular cross section of the electron beam. the interaction impedance for a different axis position d of the electron beam is shown in fig. 3. an optimum value d = 600 μm is assumed in the following, which ensures an averaged interaction impedance of about 1 (cid:2) in the operation frequency range, sufficient to support adequate energy transfer from the electron beam to the propagating wave. a substantial improvement of the interaction impedance can be obtained by reducing the pillar cross section w. fig. 4 shows the interaction impedance as a function of the phase shift for three values of w. an increase of 100% is obtained when reducing the pillar dimension by 100 μm (w = 150 μm).

iii. fabrication and cold test fig. 5. fabricated dcw sws. (a) side view of the pillars. (b) top view of the fabricated top and bottom parts.

fig. 6. detailed view of the fabricated pillars of the dcw.

fig. 7. comparison between the simulated and measured s parameters for the ten period dcw with linear taper.

two identical test dcws were realized by conventional cnc milling in aluminum (fig. 5) with 10 periods and 20 periods, respectively. fig. 8. comparison between the simulated and measured dispersion curves of the fabricated dcw.

fig. 9. as a function of the pillar section. (c) simulation setup. (a) gain and (b) output power for 80 period single section twt

adopted to connect the wr 10 flanges. each coupler has 15 pillar pairs with the height linearly tapered from the nominal height of 640 μm down to 80μ m. each dcw was fabricated in two parts: a bottom flat part with all the pillars and a top part with the waveguide and the electron beam tunnel. this fabrication approach reduces the complexity of the cnc milling process and allows the use of tooling with larger diameter. it is worthy of note that the assembly of the two parts needs only alignment pins and screws. fig. 5 shows the fabricated top and bottom parts and the pillar profile. before the assembly, the two parts were cleaned by ultrasonic agitation in acetone and ipa to remove organic residues and metallic debris from the milling process. a microscopic view of the fabricated pillars is shown in fig. 6.

the s parameters of the fabricated dcws were measured by a rhode and schwarz vector network analyzer with a w band millimeter wave extension. the s parameters of the ten period dcw are shown in fig. 7. the measured s21 is lower than the simulated value. this can be explained by the relatively low electrical conductivity at the interface between the two parts and a slightly irregular surface flatness caused by the vibration of tooling during the cnc fabrication process. however, the good agreement demonstrates that the tolerance of a few microns typical of an affordable cnc milling process has a limited effect on the performance. the fabrication of the dcw for the final twt will be done in copper, and the two parts will be joined by diffusion bonding. an identical dcw with 20 periods has also been fabricated in aluminum. the s parameters were measured, for the purpose of obtaining the phase difference of the transmitted signal. the dispersion curve of the dcw has been derived by the difference of the measured phases of the transmitted signals of the 10 period and the 20 period dcws. the phase difference is given by

where (cid:3)ϕ( f ) is the phase difference as a function of freuency f , (cid:3)l is the dcw length difference, β( f ) is the propgation constant, and p is the period of the dcw . the experimental and simulated dispersion curves of the dcw are shown in fig. 8. it can be observed the very good agreement in the operation frequency band. the difference at the lower band edge is mainly caused by the use of the w band converters at the limit of their band, below 66 ghz. consequently, the results are seriously affected by the phase distortion and extremely low signal noise ratio. the difference at the upper band edge is mainly caused by fabrication tolerances.

the large signal performance of the dcw twt is investiated via 3 d particle in cell simulations performed by cst particle studio on a workstation with gpu nvidia k40. an electron beam with a voltage of 12.8 kv, a beam current of 100 ma, and a 160 μm radius is considered. the electron beam voltage in the hot simulation is optimized to maintain satisfactory beam wave interaction, and thus it is slightly higher than the value predicted by the cold analysis. the focusing magnetic field is set as 0.3 t. the conductivity of the copper is reduced to σ = 2.353 × 107 s/m to account for eventual ohmic losses due to surface roughness. the input power at port 1 is 100 mw. this value is compatible with solid state power amplifiers available in the market. a first set of simulations was performed to evaluate the performance of a single section twt with 80 periods, as a function of the pillar cross section, with all the other dimensions fixed. this study permitted to verify the effect of the improvement of the interaction impedance due to the reduction of the pillar section reported in fig. 4. fig. 9 shows that more than 6 db gain and 40 w output power increase is obtained by reducing the pillar dimensions.

v. dcw twt design

the 71 76 ghz dcw twt is made of two sections with 40 and 80 periods of uniform pillars, respectively, separated by a sever. this is a typical two section configuration to suppress the self excitation and achieve high gain. the dimensions of the pillars are the same as in table i, to evaluate the full twt performance in the conservative case of pillars with w = 250 μm. the two sections are connected by an electron beam tunnel which is cut off at w band. each end of the dcw is connected to the flange by a coupler connected to a 90° dcw bend. the bent dcw allows a significant reduction in the length of the sws, which translates into a reduced length of the focusing magnets, by removing the coupling of the te10 mode to the dcw mode from the interaction zone. each coupler comprises 18 pillar pairs tapered in height and six pillars with nominal height. the configuration of the height tapered pillar pairs is shown in fig. 10(b). the four pillar pairs in the bend region before the coupler are shaped and optimized to provide good transmission property, easy manufacturability, and sufficient distance from the electron beam. the length of the whole structure in the z direction is about 145 mm.

the input power signal is injected in port 1 of section i and propagates toward port 2, modulating the electron beam current. the slightly amplified wave is then absorbed in port 2 to avoid reflections, by high loss material (graphite). the modulated electron beam travels into section ii, where the signal is amplified by the longer interaction section, to reach the specification amplitude at port 4. the small portion of fig. 11. simulated s parameters of section i of the dcw twt.

input and output signal variations with time for the dcw twt

fig. 13. electron energy distribution as a function of the axial distance for the dcw twt.

reflected power in port 3 will also be absorbed by high loss absorbing materials.

the optimization of the dcw bend and the coupler was carried out by cst microwave studio . fig. 11 shows the simulated s parameters of section i (port 1 to port 2) that includes two dcw bends and two couplers, assuming a reduced copper conductivity σ = 2.353 × 107 s/m to take into account the finite surface roughness of the fabricated dcw. the s11 is better than −14.7 db in the frequency band. the s21 is around −4 db having conservatively assumed high copper ohmic loss. in this simulation, the electron beam, generated by a conventional pierce gun, has 12.8 kv voltage, 150 ma current, and a radius of 160 μm. the higher current was used to increase the gain due to the use of pillars with w = 250 μm. the focusing magnetic field is set as 0.3 t. the input power at port 1 is 100 mw.

fig. 12 shows the instantaneous signal amplitudes at port 1, port 2, and port 4 at 71 ghz. the signal at port 2 starts to grow earlier than that at port 4 as expected. the gain achieved at port 2 is about 8 db due to the low beam wave energy interaction resulting from the short dcw length. the output power at output port 4 stabilizes at about 4 ns, producing 72.7 w power. the output signals at ports 1 and 3 are negligible, demonstrating the good matching of the couplers. the electron energy distribution in the axial direction (fig. 13) fig. 14. output power and gain of the dcw twt.

fig. 15. output power as a function of the input power at 71 and 76 ghz.

shows a strong modulation of the electron beam in section ii of the twt, where most of the electrons lose energy in favor of the wave.

output power and gain in the 71 76 ghz frequency band are shown in fig. 14. the output power varies from 69 to 79 w, with output power levels at the frequency band edges higher than those at the center. this can be explained by the variation of the synchronization condition and interaction impedance across the band. a flat gain of about 28.5 db is demonstrated. the output power and gain variation of the dcw twt as a function of the input power, at 71 and 76 ghz, are shown in fig. 15. the output power increases at the increase of input power from 40 to 140 mw, showing the expected saturation for higher input power. the output gain reduces at the increase of the input power.

a 71 76 ghz dcw twt has been designed for high dataate satellite communications downlink. an output power of about 70 w and 28 db gain across the frequency band have been demonstrated. good performance, simple fabrication by cnc milling, easy assembly, and robustness to tolerances make the dcw suitable sws for space millimeter wave tubes to enable w band high capacity communication satellites. the dcw has been experimentally validated by showing good agreement between simulations and measurements of both s parameters and the dispersion curve. the presented dcw twt design is also a test vehicle at scaled frequency for using the same topology for a 220 ghz twt for high capacity wireless networks for terrestrial applications.