double reflector configuration for optimal exposure of wideband focal plane arrays with optical beamforming a. dubok, a. al rawi, n. tessema, e. tangdiongga, m. h. a. j. herben, g. gerini, and a. b. smolders

for a wideband focal plane array (fpa) configuration is presented for ka band applications with a limited scan range, e.g., ground terminals for satellite communication. the proposed reflector configuration allows maximizing the number of active array elements and minimizing the actual array size during scanning. in addition, the fpa configuration has been optimized for wideband optical true time delay beamforming, resulting in wideband operation from 20 to 40 ghz. based on a minimum required 80% aperture efficiency at 30 ghz, the double reflector concept allows expanding the illuminated region of the array by a factor of 60 compared to traditional prime focus configurations. the proposed configuration also decreases the magnification factor m by a factor of 2.5 compared to the double parabolic configuration for a ±1.5° scan range. abstract— an optimized double reflector antenna concept

index terms— antenna array, antenna simulation, optical arrays,

i n the past decades, focal plane arrays (fpas) have become an

interesting alternative to conventional horn fed reflector antennas in a number of applications, e.g., in radio astronomy and in ka band satellite communication . however, the small number of simultaneously active array elements is representing a serious limiting factor for this technology, in terms of number of multiple beams or scan range and level of achievable effective isotropic radiated power (eirp) . a low eirp level limits the use of lowost silicon integrated circuits (ics). in addition, it is a challenge to provide a proper exposure of the fpa even for relatively small scan angles of the main beam, due to the significant beam deviation in the focal plane (see fig. 1) . therefore, it is necessary to investigate various reflector configurations in order to improve the fpa illumination and increase the number of simultaneously active elements during beam scanning over a wide instantaneous bandwidth. this communication presents the outcome of a study to overcome these limitations. our goal was to develop a wideband fpa system operating in the frequency band 20 40 ghz. the beamforming of the array elements is done with a novel optical beamforming network, resulting in multibeam operation over a wide instantaneous bandidth . the optical beamformer utilizes true time delay (ttd), implemented in optical ics. these optical ics generate frequencyndependent therefore alleviating in wideband beamformers. the beam squinting problem prevalent a dispersive optical ttd device generates wavelength dependent time delays, and thus can be used to generate simultaneous multiple beams by using light sources of different wavelengths. in addition, ttd includes immunity to electromagnetic interference, scalability, and low weight thanks to the high level of photonic integration of

manuscript received june 6, 2016; revised february 27, 2017; accepted may 14, 2017. date of publication may 29, 2017; date of current version august 2, 2017. authors

5612 az eindhoven, the netherlands (e mail: a.dubok@tue.nl).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this communication are fig. 1. with a single reflector. (a) beam deviation during scanning. (b) geometry of the fpa system

the optical beamformer circuits. a linear phase distribution along the array elements of the fpa is an important requirement for the realzation of a compact ttd optical beamformer circuit . therefore, our antenna design targets a linear phase distribution along the array elements of the fpa.

another important requirement for our fpa system is related to the scan range. we have investigated two specific scan ranges: ±1.5° and ±3° for 2 d scanning, which is much more challenging than 1 d scanning. these are typical values for reflector installation and calibration in ka band in two way satellite communication and surveys for radio astronomy , respectively. in conventional fpa systems the array is not used very efficiently, even in the case of a limited scan range. the number of simultaneously illuminated array elements is limited due to the small region of high power density in the focal plane. in addition, the required size of the array is quite large due to the significant spot beam deviation from the array center during scanning. as a consequence, the number of simultaneous active elements is small compared to the total number of array elements. therefore, the achieved eirp levels, as well as the scan performance, are limited . in summary, we have the following requirements for the fpa system:

1) wideband in the range of 20 40 ghz; 2) linear phase distribution in the focal region; 3) wide illumination area of the array to maximize the eirp; 4) decreased beam deviation in focal plane scanning.

in this communication, we will optimize the fpa system for these requirements. for that purpose, we will investigate and compare three configurations: 1) a classical prime focus reflector; 2) a doublearabolic configuration; and 3) our proposed optimized fpa configuation. we will use a classical prime focus reflector with f/d = 0.6 and d = 0.8 m. the array element spacing is chosen as λ0/2 at 40 ghz, where λ0 is the free space wavelength. all simulations have been performed with general responsibility assignment software patterns (or principles) . (a) field distribution of a reflector antenna in the focal plane. (b) 2 d fig. 2. illustration of the airy pattern in the focal plane of a classical prime focus reflector with f/d = 0.6,

fig. 3. normalized power density distribution of the electric field in the focal plane of a classical prime focus reflector with f/d = 0.6.

for large f/d ratio's and small scan angles, when neglecting the spillover and decoupling efficiencies, the co polar component of the electric field distribution in the focal plane of a prime focus reflector can be approximated by

where j1 is the bessel function of the first kind with order 1, (cid:3)0 = π/4 is the subtended angle of the reflector, k is the wavenumer, and r is the distance from the center of the focal plane or aperture radius (see also fig. 1 and ).

according to (1), it is clear that the same reflector operating at higher frequencies will illuminate a smaller region in the focal plane. as an example, the electric field in the focal plane for a classical prime focus reflector is presented in fig. 2. the noralized power density distribution of the electric field, calculated according to (1), is shown in fig. 3. by integrating the electric to the total power field on the focal plane and normalizing it ptot received by the reflector and free space impedance z0, it is possible to calculate the aperture efficiency η(r ) in the focal plane (see fig. 1) , which is presented in fig. 4

according to figs. 1 3, the illuminated region in the focal plane is relatively small. when we assume an array element spacing of λ0/2 at the highest frequency (40 ghz), only two to three elements could be located in the area of maximum power density (above the −3 db level). fig. 4 shows that by considering larger array surfaces, the aperture efficiency first increases very quickly until r reaches fig. 4. aperture efficiency in the focal plane of a classical prime focus reflector with f/d = 0.6.

fig. 5. phase distribution in the focal plane of a classical prime focus reflector with f/d = 0.6.

the first airy ring and then remains practically constant. this fact limits the number of simultaneously involved array elements, and as a result, limits the eirp level and the beam scanning capabilities.

for the considered fpa system employing a wideband optical beamforming network, it is required to have a linear phase distribution along the array elements. the phase distribution in the focal plane of the investigated parabolic reflector is shown in fig. 5 as well as an example of an optimal phase distribution in the order of the optical beamformer to be used. it is clear that the phase distribution is far from linear along the aperture radius at a single frequency. if we consider the aperture area at 30 ghz for which the normalized power density is above −3 db (see fig. 3), the linearity of the phase distribution shows a root mean square (rms) error of 6.36°. this will deteriorate the overall performance of our fpa system with optical beamforming .

the aperture efficiency and field distribution cuts for different scan angles of the main beam are presented in fig. 6. we can observe that for various scan angles of the main beam, the region of maximum power will have almost the same size, but will be shifted away from the array center. this means that the array size should be increased in order to provide scanning capabilities. however, the number of simultaneously active elements will remain the same.

iii. double parabolic reflector configuration

double parabolic reflector configurations are commonly known as imaging reflector systems . they are constituted by a feeding phased array properly magnified by two reflector antennas. such systems efficiently combine the advantages of reflector and array antennas. they are commonly used to generate reconfigurable beams over a small angular scan range. some sort of beam compression is fig. 6. aperture efficiency and electric field cuts in the focal plane for different scan angles of a classical prime focus reflector with f/d = 0.6, f = 30 ghz.

realized to increase the illuminated region of the array significantly and, as a consequence, the number of simultaneously active elements. the working principle of a double parabolic reflector and the relevant geometrical dimensions are schematically shown in fig. 7.

the simulated electric field distribution in the array plane for a double parabolic reflector configuration with fm /dm = 0.6 and fm /fs = 8 is shown in fig. 8. the corresponding aperture efficiency is shown in fig. 9. the size of the subreflector was chosen based on the array size from section ii for the scanning case of ±3° and aperture efficiency of 95%, and dm/ds = 4.5 (see fig. 6). the same excitation mechanism has been used. a planar array has been located at the surface of the main reflector. the subreflector blockage was included in the simulation. the resulting phase distribution in the array plane is presented in fig. 10. fig. 9. aperture efficiency in the array plane of a symmetrical doublearabolic reflector, fm /dm = 0.6 for main reflector and fm /fs = 8 for subreflector. blockage of subreflector is included.

of the array has been increased by a factor of 150, for this particular example. the aperture efficiency curve is less steep than in the case of a prime focus reflector, which indicates a broadening of the focal field distribution. in addition, the phase relation between the array elements shows an inverted v kind of distribution as a function of r for reasonable array sizes over the entire frequency range, with a linearity error of 3.06° at 30 ghz.

the aperture efficiency and electric field cuts for different scan angles are presented in fig. 11. the required array size in case of scanning should be significantly increased in order to achieve sufficient aperture efficiency. the poor performance is due to the amplification of the incidence angle on the array surface, expressed by the magnification factor m θ0 = fm fs fig. 12. single shifted feed. (c) ring focus dual reflector with fpa. (a) ring focus dual reflector. (b) ring focus dual reflector with

where θ is the angle of incidence of the incident field and θ0 is the incident angle on the array surface (fig. 7). as a result, even a small beam deviation of the incident wave causes a significant shift of the irradiated region. as a consequence, the array size should be significantly increased. therefore, the number of active elements will be still significantly less than the number of inactive array elements. therefore, also with this configuration an effective exposure of the fpa cannot be achieved.

classical prime focus reflector antennas have a relative small illuminated region in the focal plane and do not allow to fully use the fpa capabilities. a double parabolic reflector allows increasing significantly the number of simultaneously active elements in the fpa system and can improve the linearity of the phase relation between the array elements. however, there is still the issue of the magnification of the incident angle on the projected fpa surface. therefore, we need to find a way to decrease the magnification factor and to keep a sufficient number of active elements, at the same time. in order to do that, we have optimized the ratio between the required aperture radius for a 1.5° scan angle versus 0° scan angle (ar1.5) and the ratio between a scan angle of 3° and 0° (ar3).

as a starting point, a cassegrain ring focus configuration has been chosen . in these systems, the electromagnetic field is focused in a single feed point located in the plane of the main reflector [see fig. 12(a)]. it the feed away from the subreflector and, at the same time, keep all beams focused on the feed, by optimization of the subreflector shape . in this way the beam can be broadened in the main reflector plane, where the array will actually be placed. if the illumination cone of the second reflector has a focus on infinity [fig. 12(b)], the configuration could be considered as a double parabolic reflector of section iii.

the field distribution in the array plane has been determined for a number of cases in which the focal point is shifted away from the original feed plane. the fpa is located at the surface of the main reflector [see fig. 12(c)]. the size of the subreflector has been defined in the same way as for the double parabolic configurations of section iii. the aperture efficiency has been calculated based on the electric field distribution according to (2). the required aperture radius, corresponding to an 80% aperture efficiency at 30 ghz, is presented in fig. 13 for angles of incidence of 1.5° and 3°. wider scanning (e.g., 5° and 10°) is an issue, due to the necessity of a larger fig. 13. aperture radius versus scan angle based on 80% aperture efficiency for a ring rocus dual reflector with fpa f = 30 ghz. blockage of subreflector is included.

fig. 14. ratios between aperture radius for different angle of incidence of the incident field based on 80% aperture efficiency for a ring focus dual reflector with fpa f = 30 ghz. blockage of subreflector is included.

from fig. 13, we can conclude that the aperture radius is increasing with increasing shift from the feed plane (l s) for all considered scan angles. however, for the case of nonzero incidence (1.5° and 3°), the required aperture radius grows faster than for normal incidence. in order to find the optimum, the ratios ar1.5 and ar3 are presented in fig. 14. it appears that these ratios can be optimized as a function of l s [see fig. 12(b)]. according to fig. 14, the minimum value of ar1.5 is 1.54 and the minimum of ar3 is 2.22. for the classical prime focus reflector case, according to fig. 6, we find that ar1.5 = 2.94 and ar3 = 5.87. for the double parabolic reflector configuration, according to fig. 11, we find that ar1.5 = 2.06 and ar3 = 3.43. therefore, the proposed configuration is optimal in terms that we minimized the ratio between the required aperture radius for a 1.5° scan angle and 0° (ar1.5) and the ratio between a scan angle of 3° and 0° (ar3).

the optimization for both scan angles at the same time is not posible. each value of l s produces a different shape of the subreflector with different eccentricity. in our case, the optimal value of l s for both cases quite similar. therefore, we have been used l s = 0.22 m as the optimal configuration. in this case, the ratio between the main reflector and the subreflector is dm /ds = 8, fm /dm = 0.6, and fs /ds = 6.9. the position of the subreflector has been chosen in such a way that we obtain an aperture efficiency level of 95% on the subreflector surface for the scanning case of ±3°.

the calculated field distribution in the array plane for the nonscaning case of the optimized symmetrical double reflector is presented in fig. 15, and the corresponding aperture efficiency in fig. 16. the phase distribution in the array plane is presented in fig. 17(a). (a) field distribution of an optimized symmetrical double reflector fig. 15. antenna. (b) 2 d illustration of pattern in the array plane of an optiized symmetrical double reflector, fm /dm = 0.6 for main reflector and f = 30 ghz .

fig. 17. (a) phase distribution in the array plane of an optimized symetrical double reflector fm /dm = 0.6 for main reflector. (b) frequency dependence of the required phase for the central array element (r = 0) for various investigated reflector configurations. (c) phase distribution between array elements of an optimized symmetrical double reflector with discretizaion of λ/2 at the highest frequency in the frequency band 20 40 ghz. (d) phase distribution in the array plane for investigated reflector configuations,

the blockage of the subreflector is included in all these results. according to figs. 15 and 16, the illuminated region in the array plane is significantly expanded as compared to the classical primeocus reflector in section ii. the illuminated area of the array has fig. 18. aperture efficiency and electric field cuts for different angles of incidence of the incident field in the array plane of an optimized symmetrical double reflector fm /dm = 0.6 for main reflector f = 30 ghz.

comparison of investigated reflector configurations at 30 ghz. element spacing is λ0 /2 at 40 ghz

been increased by a factor of 60 based on an aperture efficiency of 80%. the phase distribution between the array elements has approximately a linear v kind of shape within the array size with rms error of 1.65° at 30 ghz. for the central array element (r = 0), the phase dependence versus frequency is very linear (rms error does not exceed 1% at 30 ghz for all considered reflector configurations) [see fig. 17(b)]. therefore, this configuration is more suitable for the optical beamforming network. fig. 17(c) presents the phase distribtion for the optical beamforming, which operates in a band 20 40 ghz, with discretization along frequency 1 ghz and λ0/2 distance between array elements, at the highest frequency. fig. 17(d) presents the phase distribution in the array plane at 30 ghz for all investigated reflector configurations.

next, we investigate the aperture efficiency and field distribution cuts for different scan angles. results are presented in fig. 18. it is clear that, with increasing scan angle, the region of maximum power becomes larger, but it is less shifted from the center, as compared to a prime focus reflector or double parabolic reflector. we observe a more uniform distribution of power over the array elements. this is significantly improved compared to the investigated configurations in sections ii and iii, where there are elements with zero aperture efficiency like those in figs. 6 and 11 for the 1.5° and 3° scan case. at the same time, the number of active elements is signifcantly increased. the required overall array dimensions are also much smaller as compared to the double parabolic reflector from