dual band circularly polarized transmitarray antenna for satellite communications at 20/30 ghz

hamed hasani, joana s. silva, santiago capdevila, maría garcía vigueras, and juan r. mosig

abstract— a novel dual band polarization independent for transmitarray communication systems in ka band. thanks to its unit cell topology, the transmitarray antenna demonstrates almost complete independent performance at the two design frequency bands of 20 and 30 ghz. as a proof of concept, a transmitarray antenna prototype having a plate size of 80×80 mm2 has been fabricated using printed board technology. a dual band circularly polarized ridged cavity antenna feeds this planar structure and the relative translational displacement between the feed and the transmitarray allows beam steering. the antenna performance has been validated via experimental results, which demonstrate good agreement with the theoretical and simulation predictions carried out with commercial software packages.

dual band, index beam steering, millimeter wave, polarization, communications, ka band, cavity backed feed antenna.

n the recent years, satellite communication systems operating in ka band (downlink: 17 21.2 ghz; uplink: 27.51 ghz) have attracted great attention mainly due to the spot beam coverage allowing frequency reuse operation and consequently higher capacity. moreover, operation in higher frequencies allow considerable size reduction, which per se has boosted the interest on satellite on the move applications (sotm) guaranteeing an always connected nomadic behavior. transmitarrays antennas have proven to be reliable candidates (as high gain, low profile and low cost antennas) for multiple applications, especially those of satellite communications systems.

h. hasani formerly with laboratoire d'electromagnétisme et d'antennes, école polytechnique fédérale de lausanne, lausanne 1015, switzerland, and currently with sivantos gmbh, henri dunant str. 100, 91058 erlangen, germany (hamed.hasani@sivantos.com).

j. s. silva is with laboratoire d'electromagnétisme et d'antennes, école polytechnique fédérale de lausanne, lausanne 1015, switzerland, and currently with huber+suhner ag.

s. capdevila is with laboratoire d'electromagnétisme et d'antennes,

école polytechnique fédérale de lausanne, lausanne 1015, switzerland. et

de télécommunications de rennes, umr cnrs 6164, institut national des sciences appliquées de rennes, rennes 35708, france.

j. r. mosig formely with laboratoire d'electromagnétisme et d'antennes, a transmitarray antenna consists of a flat surface illuminated by a feed antenna. the flat surface comprises an array of multi layer printed structures each with a different geometrical parameter transmission amplitude and phase of the incoming wave. the phase control capability should allow the array to transform the incoming spherical wave front into plane wave hence generating a highly directive beam in the far field region that controls the

in the literature, several multi band transmitarrays have been described [3 11]. in a printed dual band transmitarray at 20/30 ghz is introduced which uses interlaced crossipoles printed on four layers. an active transmitarray for similar purposes is presented in for beam direction at broadside which uses dual band subarrays. a dual band transmittarray is introduced in performing at around 12 and 17 ghz with linear polarization at each frequency. in and cell topologies are proposed for dual band performance controlling the transmission phase through element rotations and hence restricting the operation to circular polarization only. as for metallic transmitarrays a dual polarized cell topology has been recently introduced in but for closely spaced frequencies of 11 and 12.5 ghz. a recent concept is introduced in for dual band, dual polarized performance at 20/30 ghz. the transmitarray is composed of seven layers each composed of an array of printed cross dipoles and square rectangular apertures. in addition, beam steering functionality is achieved through the relative positioning of feed vs transmitarray surface. in the design process, the phase response of the proposed cell at each frequency is a function of the size of each element and thus a time consuming cell optimization process has been carried out in order to obtain the optimum transmission amplitude/phase. furthermore, the usage of dielectrics is unavoidable which makes the antenna suitable only for ground terminals.

this paper presents a cell topology for dual band dualolarized performance at 20 and 30 ghz which, compared to the additional solutions, distinctive advantages. the proposed cell demonstrates independent performance at each frequency band which eliminates the need for time consuming phase optimization techniques and brings flexibility since the antenna can be designed to have arbitrary beam direction at each frequency band. furthermore, due to the dual polarized structure of the cell, it can be employed for any polarization (e.g.: circular, linear, slant). above mentioned possesses

in addition to the above mentioned cases, the cell has the potential to be developed as a fully metallic topology which can be an attractive solution for space environments. the main challenge encountered in this case is the cell miniaturization in 1

order to avoid grating lobes at 30 ghz. this difficulty stems from the relatively large difference in the design frequencies and it is discussed in detail in this paper.

the paper is organized as follows. the unit cell topology is presented in section ii. the antenna design along with a simulation scenario is described in section iii. section iv presents the simulated and measured beam steering results based on the concept used in . the possibility of an extension to a fully metallic transmitarray is presented in section v along with simulation results. finally, conclusions are drawn in section vi.

the unit cell geometry along with the assigned input and output floquet ports, are shown in fig. 1. the remaining four surrounding walls are assigned with periodic boundary condition (pbc). the cell is composed of three layers, each being composed of interlaced dual polarized slot elements for phase regulation at 20 and 30 ghz. the phase regulating parameters are denoted as l1 (for 20 ghz) and l2 (for 30 ghz). the cell is thus capable of operation for elliptical polarization in general and in particular for linear, circular and slant polarizations. while a simple cross slot element has been chosen for operation at 30 ghz, a swastika cross is designated for operation at 20 ghz for miniaturization purposes to maintain the cell size no larger than 5.3 mm. this cell size should allow beam deviation up to 60 degrees from the broad side direction at 30 ghz without the appearance of grating lobes. furthermore, as will be discussed in detail in section v, a swastika cross proves to be an excellent candidate for the design of the fully metallic dual band transmitarray antenna. we should also note that according to the cell is a rot 4 type topology; a topology whose amplitude and phase response is invariant to a physical 90 degrees rotation around z axis (assuming z axis normal to the paper in fig. 1a). this topology in theory demonstrates zero cross polarization level in case of a normal wave incidence.

the slot elements are designed to be printed on rogers870 with 0.254 mm of thickness and permittivity 2.33. layers are separated by air gaps of fixed thickness h = 3.6 mm, which makes the total array thickness of around 7.5 mm. in the current dual band design we have chosen the value of 3.6 mm as layer separation distance due to the availability of an antenna support which was previously designed and fabricated for similar purposes. furthermore, as will be shown later, the chosen value is adequate for proof of concept purposes.

fig. 2 shows the cell amplitude and phase response at each frequency with respect to their own corresponding phase regulating parameter i.e. l1 or l2. at 20 ghz, the cell demonstrates around 300o phase range within the 3 db range for transmission power |s12|2. at 30 ghz however return loss has increased for certain values of l2 within the 3db transmission power range. the cell performs better at 20 ghz, where the 3.6 mm layer separation is closer to a quarter wavelength at 20 ghz (λ20/4 = 3.75 mm) than at 30 ghz (λ30/4 = 2.5 mm). this effect is better shown in fig. 3, where simulated cell transmission and reflection magnitudes are obtained in terms of frequency for different values of layer (a)

fig. 1 the geometry of the proposed cell: (a) front view (b) 3d view.

fig. 2 phase and amplitude response of the cell: (a) at 20 ghz with respect to l1; (b) at 30 ghz with respect to l2. 2

fig. 3. cell frequency response for transmission and reflection power for different values of layer separation.

as shown, for a layer distance of 2.5 mm the performance is best at 30 ghz, where this quarter wavelength distance results in a flat transmission power across the bandwidth. at 20 ghz, however, transmission drop will be produced at the higher end of the bandwidth. as the layer separation is increased to an intermediate value of 3 mm, drops occur at both frequencies in the extremities of the transmission response. however, the performance remains acceptable since reflection coefficient is kept below 10db within the cell bandwidth. further increase in layer separation to the current value of 3.6 mm, enhances the performance at 20 ghz while imposing a negative effect at 30 ghz.

the interested reader is referred to , where a thorough study on the layer separation effect and maximum achievable phase range of periodic structures intended for transmitarray design has been carried out.

in fig. 4, the response of the cell at each frequency has been simulated in cst against variations of the parameters directly linked to that frequency (l1 for 20 ghz, l2 for 30 ghz). one of the main advantages of the cell proposed in this paper is now evidenced here. as shown in fig. 4a, at 20 ghz the phase response is only a function of l1 and the variation of l2 has almost no influence. the reciprocal is visible in fig. 4b at 30 ghz. these results can in fact be interpreted as having two independent and uncoupled singleand transmitarrays sharing the same surface.

one of the factors that should also be considered is the cell phase and amplitude sensitivity to the angle of incidence. to this end, the cell response, at both 20 and 30 ghz has been obtained for several oblique wave incidences for a circularly polarized impinging wave. as shown in fig. 5a, at 20 ghz the cell phase response is resilient to the simulated angles of the cell incidence. there occurs however a drop (a)

fig. 4 phase responses: a) at 20 ghz; b) at 30 ghz. please note that the variation of phase regulation parameter at one frequency has almost no effect on the phase response at the other frequency.

transmission response for l1 values around 3.35 mm (fig. 5b). as the angle of incidence increases, this reduction becomes more noticeable reaching values of 3 db at (θ = 30o, φ = 45o, l1 = 3.3 mm). furthermore, as shown in fig. 5c, level of cross pol increases as well for all values of l1. note that the broadside cross pol level is not shown, as it remains below 40 db.

to better understand this issue, fig. 6 shows the cell frequency response for different incident angles at the resonant value of l1 (= 3.35 mm). as shown, for higher incident angles a magnitude drop in transmission response occurs which increases with the angle of incident reaching to the maximum value of 6 db. the main reason is that under these conditions, the cell is transparent to tm waves while it blocks the te waves, which results in the expected drop value of 6 db for a circularly polarized impinging wave. the consequence of this behavior is that, certain cells on the transmission values transmitarray will exhibit sensitive depending on their perceived angle of incidence from the feed and on their phase regulating parameter value (here l1). this phenomenon will also result in somewhat higher scan losses.

corresponding results for incident angle sensitivity at 30 ghz are shown in fig. 7. here the transmission phase response shows low levels of deviation (maximum 50o) at oblique incident angles while the transmission amplitude response shows deviations at low values of l2 (see fig. 7b). this is mainly due to the layer electrical distance at 30 ghz as evidenced in fig. 3. cross pol level, shown in fig. 7c, similar to 20 ghz, increases for all values of l2 at oblique incident angles especially when φ = 45o. 3

(c) fig. 5 at 20ghz for circular polarization. cell amplitude and phase response for several oblique waves with incidence angle (θ, φ).

fig. 6 cell transmission response versus frequency around 20 ghz for several oblique waves with incidence angle (θ, φ = 45o) for circularly polarized wave. l1 and l2 are kept at their resonant values: 3.35 mm and 3.7 mm, respectively.

following design considers a proof of concept transmitarray with an aperture size of 80×80 mm2 fed by a dual band circularly polarized ridged cavity slot antenna. the transmitarray is in fact comprised of two superimposed arrays (a)

with 14×14 and 13×13 elements for 20 and 30 ghz, respectively. the first design step consists in determining the optimum focal point. this can be estimated by considering the pattern of the feed antenna and the array size. if the feed antenna has different radiation patterns and directivities at each frequency band, a different value for the optimum focal point should be considered at each frequency. instead, in the current work and for the sake of technological simplicity, we chose to work with the average of the feed radiation patterns at both frequencies, thus yielding a unique value of 55mm for the optimum focal point. with this value, the angle of incidence at the array edge becomes 35o and the illumination taper becomes 5.1 db and 7.2 db on the array edge, and 8 db and 12 db on the array corners at 20 and 30ghz, respectively. as expected, the tapering tends to follow the feed different directivities at each frequency, but this can be always compensated.

the overall structure was then simulated in feko due to the unique features offered by the software which facilitates the simulation in terms of time and computation load while maintaining enough accuracy. in the simulation process, which uses integral equation formulation, the transmitarray is layers treated as a multi layer structure with all the 4

fig. 8 schematic presentation of beam scanning by lateral translation (tm) of the transmitarray.

(pec+substrate) extended to infinity. the slot elements are then placed on the metallic layers and are assigned as apertures by the solver. with this arrangement, only the slot apertures are meshed, and the solver uses embedded green's functions for multilayer planar structures to compute the fields.

the whole structure is then illuminated by a point source placed at 55 mm beneath the structure which has the individual radiation pattern of the ridged cavity slot antenna at each frequency. an important remark is that since the simulation considers an infinite pec ground plane, diffraction from the transmitarray edges, in addition to metallic losses, will not be considered.

b. cavity backed feed antenna the feed antenna has been described in [16 17]. it can be viewed as a cylindrical cavity loaded with eight ridges, which are responsible for the dual band operation, covering the entire downlink and uplink ka bands. the top wall of the cavity is a metallic circular lid with a crossed slot. the sequential rotation feeding implemented through four coaxial cables requires successive 90° phase shifts to produce circular polarization (cp). a dedicated dual layer beam forming network (bfn) comprising two microstrip circuits, each one with an input port associated to one frequency, provides this phase difference, allowing right hand cp radiation at 20 ghz and left hand cp at 30 ghz.

at both 20 ghz and 30 ghz, the insertion losses associated to the bfn are lower than 1.6 db. the complete feed antenna presents a reflection coefficient below 24 db and the isolation between the two input ports is below 20 db at both frequencies.

the antenna (including bfn) presents a measured gain of 5 dbi and half power beam width of 70o and 50o at 20 ghz and 30 ghz, respectively. the beam steering was achieved by displacing the tx array laterally from the reference position (i.e. when both tx array and feed antenna are aligned) with steps of 10 mm until a maximum of 30 mm (see fig. 8 for a schematic presentation). the simulated radiation patterns at 20 ghz and 30 ghz are presented in fig. 9. as shown, beam scanning is achieved up to 24 degrees by mechanically displacing the array with respect to the feed. the basic electromagnetic mechanism behind is elaborated in . the simulated performance indicators for both frequencies are summarized in table i, where tm is the translational movement of the tx array, αbeam is the beam tilt angle, g is the gain and δg is the scan loss. the scan losses, as indicated in table i, are caused by low aperture efficiency and a non linear phase profile on the array surface due to an off set illumination. in addition, scan loss is directly related to the unit cell radiation pattern (here we consider a dual linear polarized slot on an infinite ground plane). it can be shown that at both frequencies pure rhcp or lhcp normalized )2, power radiation pattern can well be approximated by ( 1+𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃

where  is the scan angle.

the antenna simulation demonstrates total aperture efficiency of 20% and 15% at 20 and 30 ghz respectively. these values are obtained by dividing antenna gain by the directivity achieved from a uniformly illuminated surface with an area equal to that of the transmitarray. according to the results,

one should however note that with the current feed pattern, in theory a maximum of 60% aperture efficiency (which is the multiplication of illumination and spillover efficiencies) is obtainable. in addition, efficiency is further reduced due to the transmission amplitude of cells (see fig. 2). to this end, cell efficiency has been estimated by averaging the transmission coefficient (i.e. |s12|2) of all the cells, reaching values around 70% and 65% at 20 and 30 ghz, respectively. as a result, the total estimated efficiency is obtained as follows:

where i is the illumination efficiency, s the spillover efficiency, cell the cell efficiency and feed is the feed efficiency (which in simulation is considered to be 100%). the estimated value of total efficiency for 20 and 30 ghz is thus 42% and 39%, respectively. however, there are other factors that reduce the total efficiency:

the small dimension of the array has a negative effect since the proximity of array edges perturbs the elements' expected amplitude and phase which were originally computed in a periodic environment. other factor is the radiation energy leakage into the cross polar component radiated from the feed as one moves away from its broadside direction. furthermore, according to figs. 5 7 cross pol level increases and losses occur at oblique incident angles. these factors are believed to have caused total efficiency to be reduced to the final simulated values of 20% and 15% at 20 and 30 ghz, respectively (see table iii).

iv. experimental results

in order to validate the previous theoretical results, the txrray was manufactured using standard photolithographic techniques for printed circuit board. rohacell frames (εr ~ 1.05, tanδ ~ 0.01 @ 26.5 ghz) were used to keep the layers at the proper distance, and the complete "tri layer" structure was introduced in a 3d printed support. the support was able to hold the three different layers at 3.6 mm and had the capability for lateral displacement of the transmitarray to enable the steering of the beam, while also holding the feed antenna at the desired distance, as shown in fig. 10. 5

(b) fig. 9 simulated radiation patterns for different positions of the tx array (0 mm < tm < 30 mm, with steps of 10 mm): (a) at 20 ghz; (b) at 30 ghz.

as mentioned in section iii, the simulations were carried out with special conditions to reduce simulation time and memory requirements, which implied among other, the use of infinite ground planes. since such conditions cannot be realized, in the real case the dimensions of the transmitarray are of 80×80 mm2, and thus, non idealities such as metallic losses in copper, the diffraction from the edges of the transmitarray and the presence of the antenna support will have a negative effect on the measured gain, even if we try to minimize them with absorbers.

the full transmitarray antenna was mounted in the anechoic chamber at epfl and a ridged horn antenna, which provides 6

fig. 10 fabricated prototype.

table i. simulation results summary

linear polarization over the whole frequency range of interest, was used as the probe antenna placed at the transmitarray antenna far field. in order to fully characterize the antenna, a rotation of 90º of the probe antenna is done for each point of measurement to obtain two orthogonal linear polarizations. the measurements were limited to the elevation plane of steering due to limitations of the anechoic chamber. finally, the gain was characterized for the broadside configuration by comparison using two standard gain horn antennas at 20 ghz and 30 ghz.

the transmitarray was laterally moved within the 3d printed support in steps of 10 mm, to achieve up to almost 30º of the positions are presented in fig. 11 and the measured beam steering in elevation. the measurement results for all performance indicators for both frequencies are summarized in table ii. by comparing table i and table ii, we can see that there is a difference in gain of 2.7 db at 20 ghz and 4.3 db at 30 ghz in broadside direction. this can be justified by the different scenarios considered in simulation and measurement. the most important factor is the efficiency of the feed, since in the simulation array is fed with a feed having 100% efficiency (due to the employment of lossless materials) whereas in practice it is around 50% at 20 and 30 ghz. a set of measurements were performed where v. extension to fully metallic implementation

this section is dedicated to present a qualitative elaboration on the potential advantage of the proposed cell topology in that, by slight cell modification, it can be used to readily design a fully metallic transmitarray antenna. in fact, the cell topology explained so far is a special case of the following structure.

for a fully metallic cell, the main challenge is the slot length. this is of notable importance since the absence of any dielectric calls for longer slots which in turn requires a larger cell size and ultimately limits the array maximum beam deviation due to the grating lobes.

the solution to this issue is best shown in fig. 13 where for

both frequencies, interwoven swastika crosses are employed.

fig. 13 the geometry of the proposed dual band cell for construction of fully metallic transmitarray.

as shown, due to the special geometry of the elements, they can be implemented on the same surface without any physical interference. in this structure, the layer separation is 3.6 mm with stainless steel (or in general any good electrical conductor) with 0.6 mm of thickness. cell size is designated as 5mm. for brevity purposes, we demonstrate here only the full wave simulation results carried out in ansys hfss to show the capability of the resultant array. furthermore, in order to save time and resources, the array is designed with 24 cells in one direction and periodic in the other direction, giving rise to the final structure shown in fig. 14. to make the design more realistic a metallic pin at one extremity of the array connects all the layers together to keep them at the desired separation. the array is then fed by a floquet port through the bottom surface with fundamental mode te00 while the upper surface is assigned as radiation boundary.

the array is thus designed to deflect a normally incident linearly polarized plane wave to 30 degrees off broadside direction at both 20 and 30 ghz. it is important to mention that the number of cells in the array and the deflection angle are chosen such that the required phase profile at both frequencies become periodic both with a common periodicity which corresponds to the array length t:

(c) fig. 14 a schematic view of the simulated super cell: (a) 3d view; (b) top view; (c) excitation and deflection process.

thus, periodic boundary condition can also be applied to the array extremities which in turn constitutes a super cell (see fig. 14b).

in fig. 15, simulation results of hfss are compared with those obtained by theory where each cell is considered as an individual omnidirectional radiator (phased array theory) with its specific amplitude and phase. as shown, there is a good agreement between the two methods. the array shows overall gain of 10.3 and 12.7 db at 20 and 30 ghz. in practice, the performance will be improved by gold plating the stainless steel and optimizing the relative distance between the layers. these results are quite promising for future applications, especially those intended for space communication systems.

in this paper, we have introduced a cell topology for a transmitarray antenna demonstrating a dual band, dualndependent polarized operation at 20 and 30 ghz. performance at each frequency, simplicity of design and the potential to be implemented as a fully metallic transmitarray are among the advantages of the new cell compared with similar prototypes introduced so far. as a proof of concept, a small transmitarray fed by a dual band circularly polarized feed was fabricated and measured wherein, beam steering was accomplished by a relative translational displacement of the transmitarray respect to the feeder. the measured results, confirmed by simulations carried out with cst, hfss and feko, reveal the large potentialities of the new design for future satellite applications, both on earth and in space, especially with larger transmitarray surfaces and specially tailored feeders. moreover, the presented performances can be 8

(b) fig. 15 comparison of simulation results obtained with hfss (red curve) with that of theory, computed with matlab (blue): (a) at 20 ghz; (b) at 30 ghz.

improved by optimizing the layers' separation, increasing their number and, in the case of a fully metallic transmitarray, gold plating the stainless steel parts.

http://www.newsat.com/whitepapers/572 ka band white accessed on oct. 2016. available: paper/file,

king wai lam, sze wai kwok, yeongming hwang and t. k. lo, "implementation of transmitarray antenna concept by using apertureoupled microstrip patches," proceedings of 1997 asia pacific microwave conference, 1997, pp. 433 436 vol.1

m. r. chaharmir, a. ittipiboon and j. shaker, "single band and dualransmitarray antennas," 2006 12th international band multilayer symposium on antenna technology and applied electromagnetics and canadian radio sciences conference, montreal, qc, canada, 2006, pp. 1 4.

t. chaloun, c. hillebrand, c. waldschmidt and w. menzel, "active transmitarray submodule for k/ka band satcom applications," 2015 german microwave conference, nuremberg, 2015, pp. 198 201.

s. zainud deen, s. m. gaber, h. malhat and k. h. awadalla, "b2. single feed dual polarization dual band transmitarray for satellite applications," 2013 30th national radio science conference (nrsc), cairo, egypt, 2013, pp. 27 34.

h. hasani, j. s. silva, j. r. mosig and m. garcia vigueras, "dual band 20/30 ghz circularly polarized transmitarray for sotm applications," 2016 10th european conference on antennas and propagation (eucap), davos, 2016, pp. 1 3.

p. naseri, r. mirzavand and p. mousavi, "dual band circularly polarized transmit array unit cell at x and k bands," 2016 10th european conference on antennas and propagation (eucap), davos, 2016, pp. 1 4.