dual band dual linear to circular polarization converter in transmission mode−application to k/ka band satellite communications

parinaz naseri, student member, sérgio a. matos, ieee member, jorge r. costa, ieee senior member, carlos a. fernandes, ieee senior member, nelson j. g. fonseca, ieee, senior member,

abstract—many wireless communication applications such as satellite communications use circularly polarized (cp) signals, with the requirement for easy switching of the polarization sense in satellite between up link and down link. specifically, communications, the trend is also to move to higher frequencies and integrate the receiving and transmitting antennas in one dualand terminal. however, these simultaneous demands make the design and fabrication of the composing parts very challenging. we propose here a dual band dual linear to circular polarization converter that works in transmission mode. the working principle of this polarizer is explained through an example for ka band satellite communications at 19.7 20.2 ghz and 29.5 30 ghz. the lp to cp converter is a single panel composed of identical unitells with thickness of only 1.05 mm and size of 5.3 mm × 5.3 mm. due to its operation in transmission mode, the polarizer can be combined with a simple dual band dual lp antenna to obtain the desired dual band dual cp single antenna. however, the unique property of this polarizer is yet the fact that it converts a given lp wave, e.g. x polarization, to orthogonal cp waves at the two nondjacent frequency bands, e.g. lhcp at lower band and rhcp at higher band. the polarizer is tested both with 20 ghz and with 30 ghz lp rectangular horns to illuminate a dual band transmitrray (ta) to obtain wide angle steering of cp beams. the performance of the polarizer and its association with the ta is evaluated through simulation and measurements. we also present design guidelines for this type of polarizer.

index terms— circular polarization, polarization conversion, dual band antennas, frequency selective surfaces, periodic structures, antenna filter antenna.

n some applications such as satellite and point to multi point communications, circular polarization (cp) is preferred over linearly polarized (lp) radiation because it is less influenced by multipath fading, and by polarization mismatch associated with ground terminal mobility .

for satellite communications (satcom), besides cp, an antenna is usually required to operate at two distinct and nondjacent frequency bands in orthogonal polarizations as a means to further enhance the isolation between transmit and receive signals, as power flux densities for those type of

manuscript received may, 2018. this work was partly supported by the european space agency under contract no. 4000109111/13/nl/ad and by the fundação projects e pestoe/eei/la/0008/2013 and uid/eea/50008/2013. parinaz naseri, sérgio a. matos, jorge r. costa, and carlos a. fernandes are with instituto de telecomunicações, instituto superior técnico, universidade de lisboa, av. rovisco pais 1, 1049 001 lisboa, portugal (phone +351 218418480 fax +35118418472 e mail parinaz.naseri@lx.it.pt). applications are very low and particularly sensitive to interference. for example, broadband satellite communications at ka band make use of a dedicated frequency spectrum with the downlink (d/l) at 19.7 ghz 20.2 ghz and the uplink (u/l)at 29.5 ghz 30 ghz. if the user (ground) terminal receives (d/l) a left handed circularly polarized (lhcp) electromagnetic (em) field, it should transmit (u/l) an orthogonal em field, in this case a right handed circularly polarized (rhcp) field. another important aspect for mobile satcom applications associated to spot beam broadband satellites is the polarization diversity over the service area, meaning that the user terminal must be able to switch from one polarization to another in both bands while maintaining the polarization orthogonality between the two bands when doing the handover between one spot and the adjacent one.

in order to respond to these requirement, user terminal antennas for ka band satcom often use a horn antenna combined with an orthomode transducer (omt) to feed a reflector or transmit array (ta) . alternatively, the terminal antenna may be a phased array of dual band dualp patch antennas . however, these solutions are either bulky and expensive or compact but inefficient and hard to fabricate at ka band frequencies. there is a demand for simpler solutions, low profile, low cost, and easy to fabricate up to millimeter wave frequencies. in general, cp waves can be generated by antennas like the truncated microstrip patch, crossed dipoles , helix, and spiral . however, none of these allows dual band, unidirectional radiation patterns with moderate directivity simple implementation without the need for a polarization device, typically a hybrid directional coupler. (e.g. 10 20 dbi) in a

the literature offers another way of generating cp em fields by combining an lp antenna and a polarization converter to avoid the above mentioned shortcomings of conventional cp antennas. the polarization converter is basically an anisotropic medium that fully transmits (or reflects) a given lp field with a 90° phase difference along its two main axes, orthogonal to the direction of propagation. hence, an incoming slant lp field, i.e. at 45° with respect to the two main axes, will be converted into a cp field. this sort of medium has been generally implemented using existing materials and various different metallic element

sérgio a. matos and jorge r. costa are also with instituto universitário de lisboa (iscte iul), departamento de ciências e tecnologias da informação av. das forças armadas, 1649 026 lisboa, portugal.

n. j. g. fonseca is with the antenna and sub millimetre wave section, european space agency, 2200 ag noordwijk, the netherlands (e mail: nelson.fonseca@esa.int). 1

designs in planar periodic structures such as frequency selective surfaces (fss) and metasurfaces (ms) . the existing lp to cp polarizers are mostly either wideand or single band . in , a very interesting polarizer based on a chiral cell geometry is used to convert an incident lp wave into orthogonal handedness cp waves in a low band and a high band. however, it only works for x lp incident wave, imposing a fixed cp handedness at the low and high band. this precludes the use of this type of cell for mobile satellite applications requiring polarization switching for handover purposes as described above. in , a polarization converter in reflection mode was introduced, having a dual band dual polarization capability with the desired polarization orthogonality between the two separate operating bands from a same incident lp field. this characteristic, considered for the space segment in , is demonstrated here with a polarization converter in transmission mode for the ground segment, and more specifically user terminals. using a ta instead of a polarizing reflector design allows for reduced antenna height, which is desirable for mobile user terminal applications. in addition, the dual band dual polarization characteristic would enable the design of a ta antenna with a simplified feed design, either a single polarized feed, eventually rotating 90° for handover purposes, or a dualolarized feed combined with a single wideband switch, also for handover purposes.

our paper focuses on a new compact and efficient dual band dual circular polarizer that can be used to create an antenna identified aperture feeding satisfying all requirements for user in multi spot satellite terminals communication systems. in fact, we propose a novel and lowoss dual band dual lp to dual cp polarization converter to be operated in combination with a simple dual band dual lp feed antenna. we demonstrate the performance of the polarizer fed by a lp horn to illuminate a high gain dual band wide angle beam steering ta. together they form a low profile dual band dual cp user for ka band satellite communications. we further present design rules for the polarizer.

the paper is organized as follows. in section ii the different components of the overall proposed antenna are presented and described. in section iii, the unit cell of the lp to cp converter is introduced and the effects of different physical parameters on the frequency response of the unit cell are explained. section iv presents the simulation and measurement results of two horns at 20ghz and 30ghz combined with the polarization converter. finally, in section v, the combination of the horns and the polarizer are employed to feed a dual band ta to implement a low profile dual band dual cp ground terminal for ka band satellite communication.

fig. 1 shows the scheme of the proposed dual band dualircularly polarized antenna to feed a large aperture for kaand satellite communications. the feed element excites two orthogonal linear polarizations at two frequency bands. each linear polarization illuminates the polarizer and gets converted to two orthogonal circular polarizations at the two frequency bands. notice that, for the same input linear polarization, the output circular polarization is orthogonal between the u/l and d/l bands. the design of a dual band linear antenna to feed the polarizer is out of the goals of this paper. therefore, in the present study and as a proof of concept, the lp waves at 20ghz and 30ghz are radiated by two lp rectangular horns operating at these respective frequencies.

fig. 1 scheme of the dual band dual circular polarized antenna to feed a large aperture for ka band satellite comunications. it is composed of the dual band linear polarized feed and a dual band linear to circular polarizer.

the proposed linear to circular polarization converter is a single panel composed of identical unit cells. these elements have dual band operation with low insertion loss at both bands. besides, the polarizer is physically and electrically very thin (only 1.05mm, corresponding to 0.07𝜆0 and 0.11𝜆0 at 20ghz and 30ghz, respectively).

the working principle of the polarizer starts with the splitting of a linearly polarized wave into two orthogonal linear components, like standard polarization converters do. however, it then generates −90° phase shift between them at lower frequency band and +90° phase shift at the higher frequency band. this means that a linear x polarized incident wave at lower frequency band gets converted to an lhcp wave through the polarizer, while the same lp wave gets converted to an rhcp wave at higher frequency band. the polarizer functions the same way for a linear y polarized incident wave but it converts into the orthogonal cp wave at each band compared to the x polarized incidence.

iii. linear to‒circular polarizer unit cell

the unit cells (ucs) that compose the proposed linear toircular polarization converter, presents x´ and y´ axes symmetries (𝑥´𝑦´𝑧´ is the local coordinate system of the cell, rotated 45° around the z axis with respect to the main x y z coordinate system, see fig. 2 (a)), and is similar to the ones introduced in . once an lp incident wave makes a ±45° angle in relation to the 𝑥´ − and 𝑦´ −axes of the cell, see fig. 2 (a), the cell decomposes the wave into two orthogonal components along 𝑥´ and 𝑦´ axes. to avoid generating a +45° directed incident wave, we rotated the cell by 45°. then, it transmits both components with almost equal amplitude and −90° phase difference at 20ghz and +90° phase difference at 30ghz. for example, the +45° rotated unit cell converts a yolarized incident wave to an rhcp at 20ghz and to an lhcp at 30ghz through the polarizer. 2

the cell is composed of three metallic layers parallel to the 𝑥´𝑦´ −plane, separated by thin 0.508mm dielectric rogers duroidtm 5880 slabs (𝜀𝑟 = 2.2 and 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿 = 0.0009). the first and the third layers of the uc are identical and composed of a patch and a split ring. the middle layer is composed of a circular slot plus a rectangular patch.

due to the asymmetric elements along 𝑥´ and 𝑦´ axis (lack of 90° rotational symmetry), the uc responds differently to the two orthogonal linearly polarized and normal incident waves (i.e. x´ polarized and y´ polarized waves). to operate as a linear to circular polarization converter, the cell should transmit both 𝑥´ − and 𝑦´ −polarized waves with equal amplitude and 90° phase difference. the proposed uc shown in fig. 2 provides this distinct response to 𝑥´ − and 𝑦´ −polarized normal incidences at two frequency bands.

the design and optimization of this uc was performed in cst microwave studio using periodic boundary conditions in 𝑥´ and 𝑦´ direction and open in 𝑧´ direction so that it operates at dual satellite communication ka band, i.e. 19.7 20.2 ghz and 29.5 30 ghz. the structure is illuminated by two normal plane waves propagating in 𝑧´ direction with the electric fields in 𝑥´ and 𝑦´ directions. the optimization aimed to obtain linear reflection coefficients below 10db, therefore a very good transmission, while the phase difference between the two linear transmission coefficients was required to be about ±90º at both frequency bands. the optimized dimensions of the cell are summarized in table i. the reflection coefficients of the unit cell for these normal incident waves are presented in fig. 3. the grey bars in this figure highlight the two frequency bands of the dual ka band satellite communications. fig. 4 (a) and (b) shows the amplitude and phase of the transmission coefficients of the cell for these orthogonal incidences. based on these much different coefficients of the cell, it can be concluded that the cell presents distinct features to the 𝑥´ − and 𝑦´ −polarized waves.

fig. 2 structure of the unit cell: (a) 3d view, (b) first layer, and (c) second layer. fig. 3 reflection coefficients of the unit cell for an x' polarized and a y' polarized normal incident waves.

fig. 4 (a) amplitude and (b) phase of the transmission coefficients of the unitell to an x' polarized and a y' polarized normal incident waves.

a. cell design guidelines

to design a similar cell for other frequencies, one should choose 𝑊𝑈𝐶 close to 𝜆 2⁄ where 𝜆 is the wavelength at the higher frequency band. it is also essential that the behavior of 3

the reflection coefficients of the cell follows the one depicted in fig. 3, where the first two resonances of the cell to an x´ polarized wave are below its resonance to an y´ polarized incident wave. moreover, the third resonance to an x´ polarized wave is also less than the second resonance of the cell to y´ polarized wave. however, it is also important that the transmission coefficients of the cell follow the ones depicted in fig. 4 (a), where 𝑆21𝑥'𝑥' has two zeros in the middle of the band. the two split rings behave as strongly coupled resonators for x´ polarized incident wave, while they are nonesonant for y´ polarized incident wave for frequencies below 30 ghz. this provides a 180º phase jump only in s21x'x', between the two working bands, and consequently enables opposite handedness in the transmitted cp waves in the two bands. the two identical rectangular patches in the same layers are used to achieve the transmission bands for the y' polarized wave. finally, the circular slot in the middle layer provides the transmission bands in the lower band. finally, fig. 4 (b) shows how this arrangement of the resonances allows achieving lp to cp conversion with orthogonal handedness at the two bands.

in order to achieve the mentioned resonances, one should choose rs so that c (2πrs√εeff) is lower than the lower frequency band, where c is the speed of light in free space and εeff, is approximated by (εr + 1) 2⁄ .this ensures that the first resonance in s11x´x´ is lower than the desired lower band edge, i.e. 19.7ghz in the present example. it is worth mentioning that 𝑟𝑠 is both the outer radius of the ring and the radius of the slot. this step helps finding the right substrate permittivity 𝜀𝑟. in the subsequent step, the second resonance in the s11x´x´ has to be close to the lower desired frequency band and lower than the first resonance in s11y´y. this condition is necessary to obtain −90° phase difference between the two linear transmission coefficients at the lower frequency band (19.7ghz 20.2ghz). the second resonance in s11x´x is due to the strong coupling between the two split rings and can be achieved and altered by choosing a thinner substrate . therefore, a substrate thickness based on the available standard commercial size and meeting the previous step can be found. additional tuning can be done by adjusting the width of the ring, 𝑟𝑠 − 𝑟𝑖, to shift up this secondary resonance by increasing the width. the third resonance in s11x´x´ can be altered by the choice of 𝐺𝑥 and 𝐺𝑦 so that, first, it would be close to the higher desired frequency band, 29.5ghz 30ghz, and secondly lower than the second resonance in s11y´y´, see fig. 3.

for the y´ polarized incident wave, by choosing s, the size of the split in the rings, about 2𝑟𝑠/3 and 𝑃𝑦 of about 4𝑟𝑠/3, the main behaviour of the cell to the y´ polarized incident wave is almost defined. one can fine tune s11y´y´ by altering 𝑃𝑥 to obtain ±90° phase difference in the transmission coefficient at both frequency bands and ensure that the second resonance of s11y´y´ is slightly higher than the third resonance of the s11x´x´. of course, these guidelines define only the general behavior of the cell and its resonances. after these steps, fine tuning the dimensions through full wave simulation of the unitell is required to obtain the final results. b. linear to circular polarization conversion

to assess the insertion loss and the axial ratio of the cp transmitted fields by the polarizer unit cell, the response of the cell to a y polarized field, see fig. 5 (a), is presented. the linear reflection and linear to circular transmissions of the cell to a yolarized incident wave are shown in fig. 5 (b). these coefficients are the same for an x polarized incident wave but the cell converts the x polarized of incident wave to an lhcp wave at 20ghz and to an rhcp wave at 30ghz with the same coefficients.

based on fig. 5 (b), the insertion loss of the polarizer cell is 0.1 db at 20ghz and 0.6 db at 30ghz. this loss is higher at 30ghz than 20ghz due to higher reflections of the cell to both lp incident waves, see fig. 3. the bandwidths of the cell, where the reflection coefficient is less than 10db and the cross polarization is better than 15db, are about 4% (800mhz) and 8% (2.3ghz) at 20ghz and 30ghz, respectively. the provided bandwidths are much wider than the bandwidths required for ka band satellite communication highlighted with grey shading in fig. 5.

fig. 5 reflection coefficient and linear to circular transmission coefficients of the unit cell to y polarized component normal incident wave and with the cell system of axis rotated by 45° in relation to the incident wave polarization.

it is also important to assess the sensitivity of the cell's performance to the incidence angle. fig. 6 presents the frequency response of the cell for incident angles up to 𝜃𝑖𝑛𝑐 = 45°. it is shown that for up to 45° oblique incidence, the transmission loss of the cell increases to only 0.65 db within 19.7 ghz 20.2 ghz, see fig. 6 (a) and 3.2db in 29.5 ghz 30 ghz, fig. 6 (b). moreover, the dependence of the axial ratio on the incident angle at lower frequency band and higher frequency band is presented in fig. 6 (c) and (d), respectively. 4

fig. 6 shows that the higher increase of transmission loss in the upper band is due to an increase in the reflection coefficient and not by a particular higher depolarization effect of the unit cell when compared to the lower band. the axial ratio is below 3 db and 3.4 db for incidence angles up to 45° at the lower and higher frequency bands respectively. however, for incidence angles up to 𝜃𝑖𝑛𝑐 = 30°, the insertion loss is below 0.2 db at the lower band and it is below 1.5 db at the higher band. moreover, for incidence angles up to 𝜃𝑖𝑛𝑐 = 30°, the axial ratio is better than 2.3 db at both bands. while these results are only presented for y polarized wave, they are also valid for an xolarized wave but with orthogonal cp polarizations at each band.

fig. 6 the performance of the linear to circualr polarizer cell for various incident angles at lower frequency (a) and (c) and higher frequency bands (b) and (d) : (a) y polarized wave to rhcp transmission coeffficient at lower frequency band, (b) y polarized wave to lhcp transmission coeffficient at higher frequency band, (c) axial ratio at lower frequency band, and (d) axial ratio at higher frequency band.

iv. experimental validation of the polarizer

an 8×8 array of the linear to circular polarization converter unit cell, introduced in section iii, was fabricated. each layer was printed on 20 mil rogers 5880 with 17 μm cladding. then, the printed layers were aligned and glued together with rogers 3001 bonding film, which has the same relative permittivity as the rogers 5880 substrate.

to evaluate the performance of the polarizer at both bands, it was first placed in front of a standard gain k band rectangular horn (flann microwave n° 20240 15) with 14.4dbi gain at 20ghz. then, it was placed in front of a ka band standard gain rectangular horn (flann microwave n° 22240 15) with the same gain of 14.1dbi at 30ghz. fig. 7 shows the 3d printed setup to hold the center of the polarizer in front of the center of the horn's aperture and parallel to it. as shown in fig. 7, the radiation from the horn is y polarized compared to the polarizer axis. the setup was designed to allow changing the distance between the polarizer and horn to optimize the axial ratio at both bands.

fig. 7 3d printed setup to hold the horn and the polarizer.

the distance between the polarizer and the horns was first set to d=22.5𝑚𝑚 according to simulation results. however, in the measurements, we also tested 𝑑 = 21.3𝑚𝑚 and 𝑑 = 23.7𝑚𝑚 to find the best axial ratio and gain at both bands. fig. 8 and fig. 9 present the gain and axial ratio versus frequencies for the above d values, with the polarizer illuminated by the 20ghz and 30ghz horns, respectively.

fig. 8 (a) confirms that the y polarized wave from the horn gets mainly converted through the polarizer to rhcp wave in the lower band. based on fig. 8 (a) and (b), while the rhcp gain does not change significantly for different values of 𝑑, axial ratio is only 1.4 db at 20.4 ghz for 𝑑 = 23.7𝑚𝑚. however, the value of 𝑑 has to be optimized at both bands. therefore, by looking at fig. 9 (a) and (b), it is obvious that 𝑑 = 23.7𝑚𝑚 also maximizes the gain of lhcp wave at higher band while it minimizes the gain of the cross rhcp. for this distance, the axial ratio of the 30 ghz horn and the polarizer has minimum value of 2 db at 29.7 ghz. therefore, 𝑑 = 23.7𝑚𝑚 was chosen for the rest of the measurements. it is worth mentioning that fig. 8 (a) and fig. 9 (a) confirm that the polarizer converts y polarized incidence to rhcp at lower band and lhcp at higher band. moreover, the bigger change in the 5

values of the gain at the higher band stems from two reasons. firstly, the fact that any physical change in 𝑑 is electrically larger at the higher band, and secondly, the reflection coefficient of the polarizer is larger at the higher band that causes more coupling between the aperture of the horn and the polarizer. the amount of this coupling changes with the change of 𝑑.

the cp radiation patterns of the polarizer in front of the 20 ghz horn when 𝑑 = 23.7𝑚𝑚 are compared with the horn itself at 20 ghz in fig. 10. fig. 10 shows that the polarizer converts the y polarized wave horn with low insertion loss and cross polarization level of 16 db. fig. 11 compares the measured radiation pattern of the lp horn at 30 ghz with the cp patterns of the polarizer feed by the same horn. fig. 11 shows the lp to cp conversion through the polarizer at 30 ghz occurs with only 0.7 db insertion loss and 15 db of cross polarization level. therefore, fig. 10 and fig. 11 confirm that the polarizer preserves the patterns of each horn and only convert its lp pattern to cp with minimum insertion loss.

(b) fig. 8 (a) meausred cp gains, and (b) simulated and measured axial ratio of the 20ghz horn plus the polrizer at the higher band for different values of d. lhcp

fig. 10 measured lp radiation pattern of the 20ghz horn and simulated and measured cp patterns of the polarizer in front of the horn at respectively 𝒅 = 𝟐𝟐. 𝟓𝒎𝒎 and 𝒅 = 𝟐𝟑. 𝟕𝒎𝒎 at 20ghz. 6

v. integration with a transmit array for ka band satellite communications

in this section, we employ the two standard gain lp rectangular horns working at 20 ghz and 30 ghz plus the polarizer as feeds to illuminate a dual band transmit array (ta). we will onwards call the whole combination of the horn, the polarizer and the ta, hpta. the measurements of the hpta are done at 20.4 ghz and 29.6 ghz based on the measurement results of the previous section and to obtain optimal value of axial ratio from the whole system. the dual band ta used in this section is similar to the one proposed in , where the ta has an aperture size of 196 𝑚𝑚 × 147 𝑚𝑚. a 3d printed support was used to hold the ta at the distance of 𝐹 = 100 𝑚𝑚 from the horn and in front of the polarizer. fig. 12 shows the 3d setup holding each horn, the polarizer, and the dual band ta at the designed distances from each other.

fig. 12 3d printed setup to hold the lp horn, the polarizer, and the dual band transmit array. the picture shows that the setup allows the ta to be moved along the indicated displacement axis to steer the beam.

it can be seen from fig. 12 that the ta can be moved along the shown displacement axis (a) to steer the beam. here, we moved the ta from 𝑎 = −15𝑚𝑚 to 𝑎 = 44𝑚𝑚 which corresponds to steering the beam from 𝜃 = 50° to 16° at 20 ghz and at 30 ghz in the zenith plane. the maximum of the beam is almost directed to the same angle at both frequencies with a difference less than 2º. fig. 13 (a) and (b) show the cp radiation patterns of the horn, polarizer, and the ta at 20.4ghz when the horn is x polarized and y polarized, respectively. we chose to measure the patterns at 20.4 ghz since, based on fig. 8 (b), the horn plus the polarizer provide minimum axial ratio of 1.4 db at this frequency. at the end, it can be seen that for both the horn and its 90° rotated one, the hpta provides maximum gain of 23.4 dbi and scanning loss of less than 1.8 db in the scanning range of 16° − 50°. the maximum cross polarization levels when the horn is x polarized or y polarized are 11 db and 10 db, respectively. however, the crossolarization level is dominated by the behavior of the ta, not only because of the intrinsic behavior of its unit cells, but also because of the demanding conditions for its operation with reduced f/d and wide angle scanning. improving the polarization discrimination of the aperture (ta or other), increasing f/d and increasing the distance between the lp feed and the polarizer would lead to much lower cross polarization levels, approaching those of the polarizer under plane wave excitation. it is worth noticing that orthogonal lp incident waves, here, are obtained by rotating the horn by 90°. however, the same results can be obtained by rotating the polarizer by 90°. moreover, employing a dual lp feed eliminates the need for this step.

(b) fig. 13 circularly polarized radiation patterns of the 20.4 ghz horn plus the polarizer plus the ta when horn's radiation is (a) x polarized (b) y polarized. blue lines present the rhcp patterns while the red lines present the lhcp patterns.

after measuring the hpta at the lower band, we replaced the 20 ghz horn with the 30 ghz horn in the 3d printed support, see fig. 12. based on both the gain and the axial ratio of the 30 ghz horn with the polarizer, see fig. 9, we performed the measurements at 29.6 ghz where the gain is 15.8 dbi and the axial ratio is 2.8 db. fig. 14 (a) shows the cp radiation patterns when the horn is radiating x polarized wave and fig. 14 (b) shows the radiation patterns when the horn is 90° rotated. we again moved the ta along 𝑎 −axis from 𝑎 = −15𝑚𝑚 to 𝑎 = 44𝑚𝑚 to steer the beam at 29.6 ghz. this corresponds to steering the beam from 𝜃 = 50° to 16° with maximum gain of 25.3 dbi and scanning loss of 2.5 db at 29.6 ghz. the maximum cross polarization level is 8 db due to the performance of the ta's elements at this frequency. finally, table ii summarizes the performance of the hpta for all the a positions of the ta with respect to the 20 ghz and 30 ghz horns for both lp radiations. (b)

table ii summary of the performance of the high gain dual band dual cp antenna composed of the horn, the polarizer, and the ta.

the possibility of using a single aperture to produce dualand dual circular polarized beams, capable of fast toggling of the polarization sense, is very much desired, especially for satellite communications. in this paper, the design complexity of such a primary feed is lowered by using a separate lp feed and a novel passive lp to cp polarizer. the proposed polarizer is the focus of the paper. it operates in transmission mode at two separate non adjacent frequency bands, converting each orthogonal lp incident waves into orthogonal outgoing cp waves at the two frequency bands. this unique feature of the polarizer allows toggling the polarization sense between the upink and downlink bands just by switching between two orthogonal incident lp waves. this fulfills completely the mentioned requirement in the beginning of the paragraph.

in order to isolate the behavior of the polarizer, in this paper we used 20 ghz and 30 ghz horns to generate very pure lp incident fields. it was shown that the polarizer reasonably preserves the radiation pattern of the horn while it changes the polarization of the outgoing wave as required. to assess the usefulness of the proposed concept, the horn plus polarizer assembly was successfully used to illuminate a k/ka dual band ta with cp polarization and wide angle beam steering.

the separate structure of the primary feed allows great flexibility to use the polarizer in different conditions. for instance, a low profile printed technology switched dual lp feed can be used with the same polarizer, instead of the horns. the polarizer can be redesigned for any desired frequency bands and employed separately for various applications. for example, the polarizer itself can be placed in close distance from a dual band lp reflect array and convert it to dual band dual cp reflect array similar to the work done for a single band ra but for dual band operation.

authors would like to thank the collaboration from carlos brito and joão felício for prototype construction. moreover, the authors would like to tremendously thank antonio almeida for prototype construction and measurements because without his meticulous work and great patience, implementation of this project was not possible. the authors would like to thank rogers corporation for donating substrates used for the prototypes. authors acknowledge instituto de plasmas e fusão nuclear for sharing from computational resources.

s. gao, q. luo, and f. zhu, "introduction to circularly polarized antennas," in circularly polarized antennas, ed. uk: wiley, 2014, pp. 1 25. a. d. olver, p. j.b. clarricoats, a. a. kishk, and l. shafai, microwave

horns and feeds, institution of electrical engineers, new york, 1994. 9