dual polarized reflectarray transmit antenna for operation in ku and ka bands with independent feeds

eduardo martinez de rioja, jose a. encinar, mariano barba, rafael florencio, rafael r. boix, and vicente losada

abstract—a reflectarray antenna capable of operating independently in the transmit frequencies (from a satellite) in ku band (11 13ghz) and ka band (19 20 ghz) has been proposed and demonstrated. to prove that independent beams can be optimized in each frequency band using separate feeds, a 25 cm demonstrator in that generates a (linear or circular) has been designed, dual polarization manufactured and tested. the reflectarray cells comprise two stacked sets of coupled parallel dipoles for each polarization, which permits an independent optimization of the phase for each frequency and polarization. the simulated and measured radiation patterns for both cond cross polar components are in good agreement in ku and ka bands.

index terms—communications satellites, coupled dipoles,

dual frequency, dual polarization, reflectarrays.

reflectarray antennas are composed of many radiating elements printed on a flat reflecting surface, with an illuminating feed antenna. the elements reradiate the incident field from the feed with a certain phase shift, in order to generate collimated or contoured beams . thanks to the use of planar reflective surfaces instead of shaped curved reflectors, reflectarrays have become a potential alternative for space antennas in satellite systems working in ku and ka bands . telecommunications satellites require an increasingly larger number of antennas to provide fixed services in ku band and broadband access in ka band . a major trend is to accommodate multiple payloads for different functions in the satellite. for example, the reuse of the same main reflector for ku and ka missions by a dichroic sub reflector to separate the feed chains in each frequency band will provide a significant saving of space in the satellite.

to generate independent beams in each frequency and polarization can be used to design a reflectarray to fulfill independent requirements in ku and ka bands. several papers have been

manuscript received july 22, 2016. this work was supported by the spanish ministry of economy and competitiveness under projects tec2013 43345 p, tec2016 75103 c2 1 r, and by the regional government of madrid under project spaderadar cm (p2013/ice 3000).

e. martinez de rioja, j. a. encinar and m. barba are with the applied electromagnetics group, department and radiocommunications, technical university of madrid (upm), 28040 madrid, spain jose.encinar@upm.es, mariano.barba@upm.es).

r. florencio, r. r. boix and v. losada are with the microwaves group, department of electronics and electromagnetism, college of physics, university of seville, 41012 seville, spain (e mail: rflorencio@us.es; boix@us.es; losada@us.es). reported for dual frequency reflectarrays. there are two basic strategies of design: either different resonant elements distributed on a single layer are used , or a stacked multi layer configuration in which each reflectarray layer operates at a different frequency . in the first case, the reflectarray cannot operate independently at each polarization. for example, the reflectarray cells made of a split loop combined with a malta cross work in single cp at each frequency. on the other hand, a dual band reflectarray has been developed by placing a ka band reflectarray on top of an x band reflectarray, and using an fss as separator . however, despite the results of these works are satisfactory, the antenna presents a very thick structure with a large number of layers. is employed

the reflectarray element employed in this paper is based on a two layer cell composed of two orthogonal groups of coupled dipoles. the idea of placing two orthogonally arranged sets of coupled dipoles printed on the same layer, but shifted half a period, has been used for the design of broadband reflectarrays in ku band with independent phase control in each polarization . a latter modification of the cell, which consists of adding a second level of metallization with parallel dipoles, was recently proposed to demonstrate the capabilities of reflectarrays to provide independent phase control in each polarization at two frequencies.

the aim of this paper is to propose and demonstrate a reflectarray antenna capable of operating independently in the transmit frequencies (from a satellite) in ku band (11 13 ghz) and ka band (19 20 ghz). this concept can be applied to design a satellite transmit reflectarray antenna, which is optimized to fulfill the requirements for two simultaneous missions in ku and ka bands, considering different feed chains for each mission. for example, a contoured beam can be generated in ku band by optimizing the dipole lengths in the lower layer as in , and at the same time, multiple spots can be obtained in ka band by optimizing the dipoles on the upper layer , having more room to properly accommodate the feed chains of each mission. these applications will require a large reflectarray antenna (around 1.5 m diameter). as a proof of concept, a limited sized demonstrator that generates a focused beam in dual polarization using different feeds for ku and ka bands has been designed, manufactured and tested.

independent the radiation patterns and position of optimization of feed chains for spacecraft transmit antennas in ku and ka bands, but similar reflectarray cells can be designed to operate in the receive frequencies (13.75 14.80 ghz in ku band and 29 30 ghz in ka band). although this technology obliges to separate transmit and receive antennas, the reuse of the same aperture for ku and ka missions would result in significant savings in the costs, weight and volume of the antenna systems in communication satellites. the proposed reflectarray permits an

ii. reflectarray element

the unit cell used to provide the phasing in the reflectarray, shown in fig. 1, is composed of two orthogonal arrangements of eight parallel dipoles, which are distributed on a two layer 1

configuration: there are five dipoles on the lower layer (a), and three stacked dipoles on the higher layer (b). the symmetry is maintained for the dipoles which are edge coupled to the central dipole of each set so as to ensure a lower level of cross polar radiation. this configuration has been selected with the aim of providing independent phasing in dual polarization at two in different design frequencies. the phase horizontal (h) polarization will be controlled by the lengths of the dipoles in the direction of the x axis, whereas the phase in vertical (v) polarization will be achieved with the appropriate lengths of the dipoles in the direction of the y axis. similarly, the dipoles on the lower layer will adjust the phases in ku band, while the dipoles on the higher layer will provide the phases in ka band. since the dipoles on the higher layer are shorter than those on the lower layer, the phase response of the unit cell at the lower frequency (12 ghz) will not be affected by the length of the upper dipoles, and the same applies for the phase response at the higher design frequency (19.5 ghz) regarding the length of the lower dipoles.

fig. 1. view of the reflectarray periodic structure, including four unit cells for horizontal polarization and one unit cell for vertical polarization.

a home made electromagnetic code that applies the method of moments in the spectral domain (mom sd) is used for the analysis of the reflectarray cells in a periodic environment . it computes the reflection matrix of each cell, г, formed by the co polar (γhh and γvv) and cross polar (γhv and γvh) coefficients that relate the tangential components of the incident electric field in the direction of dipoles with the tangential components of the reflected field.

a period of 10 mm (which is 2λ/3 at 20 ghz) has been selected for the horizontal (px) and vertical (py) dimensions of the cell. this period has been chosen to provide both enough room for the dipoles and enough range of phase shift in the lower band and, at the same time, to avoid grating lobes as much as possible in the higher band. the following relations between the lengths of side and central dipoles have been considered: la1 = 0.59·la3, la2 = 0.75·la3, la4 = 0.59·la6, la5 = 0.75·la6, lb1= 0.8·lb2, lb3 = 0.8·lb4. the width of the dipoles is 0.5 mm, and the edge to edge separations are sxa = sya = 0.5 mm, sxb = syb = 1.5 mm. these parameters were selected after a careful parametric study of the cell, seeking for a linear behavior of the phase response at both design frequencies. the electrical properties and thickness of the two dielectric sheets are: εra = 2.55, εrb = 2.17, tanδa = tanδb = 0.0009, ha = 2.363 mm, hb = 1.524 mm.

the reflection coefficients γhh and γvv (related to each linear polarization) have been computed at different frequencies in ku and ka bands. figure 2 shows the obtained results for |γhh| and arg(γhh) under oblique incidence (θi = 20º, φi = 0º) with both nominal and corrected values of εr and tanδ of the substrates (see section iv), as the lengths of the dipoles in the direction of x axis are increased. the graphics only indicate the lengths of the central dipoles (la3 and lb2), but note that the rest of the dipoles are also varied, while keeping the relations given above. the phase shows a fairly smooth variation (almost linear at the lower frequencies) in a 400º interval, which comprises the required 360º margin for the design of the reflectarray. similar curves are achieved for the orthogonal polarization, considering the lengths of the dipoles in the direction of y axis.

fig. 2. magnitude and phase of the cell reflection coefficient, considering h polarization and θi = 20º incidence: (a) at ku band, (b) at ka band. 2

the orthogonal dipoles placed on the same layer are practically uncoupled as was demonstrated in . so, their lengths can be separately adjusted for controlling the phase response in each linear polarization. in this case, mutual coupling between parallel dipoles layers represents the main challenge for achieving independent phase control at each design frequency. figure 3 shows the variation in phase of γhh and γvv with respect to the lengths of upper and lower dipoles in the corresponding directions, at 12 and 19.5 ghz for θi = 20º, φi = 0º angles of incidence.

fig. 3. phase of the cell reflection coefficient with respect to the lengths of the dipoles in layers a and b, at 12 ghz (a) for h pol. and (b) for v pol.; and at 19.5 ghz (c) for h pol. and (d) for v pol.

as can be observed, the element phase response at 12 ghz can be completely controlled by the lengths of the lower dipoles, which means that the design of the bottom layer at 12 ghz can be carried out without considering the dipoles on the higher layer. however, this is not exactly true for the design of the higher layer at 19.5 ghz, since there is certain dependence between the lengths of upper dipoles and the lengths previously calculated for the lower ones, which may slightly affect the phase response of the element. despite this fact, once the lower layer dimensions have been fixed, there is still enough phase range to implement the required phases at 19.5 ghz with the lengths of upper dipoles.

iii. dual frequency design of a limited demonstrator

a ku/ka band reflectarray demonstrator, comprising 625 elements disposed in a 25x25 grid (250 mm sided antenna), has been designed by using the element characterized in the previous section. the reflectarray will produce a collimated beam in dual polarization at 12 ghz and 19.5 ghz. the beam will radiate in the direction θb = 20°, φb = 0° at both design frequencies. two pyramidal feed horns have been employed to illuminate the antenna in an offset configuration. according to the reference system shown in fig. 4, the phase centers of the horns are located at the following coordinates: (x1, y1, z1) = ( 114, 0, 223) mm for ku band horn; and (x2, y2, z2) = ( 62, 0, 247) mm for ka band horn. the angle of radiation has been chosen to avoid blockage from the feeds, and also to maintain an intermediate value between the angles subtended by the two horns and the z axis from the reflectarray center, which are 14º and 27º (see fig. 4). conventional cosq(θ) functions, based on em simulations of both horns, have been used to model their radiation patterns. the ku band horn (vt140sgah15sk from vector telecom), with a gain at 12 ghz of 14.47 dbi and a 3 db beamwidth of 30°, is modelled with q = 10. the gain at 20 ghz for the ka band horn (narda 638) is 15.6 dbi, the 3 db beamwidth is 26.7° and q = 13. under these conditions, the following illumination levels are reached on the reflectarray edges: 9.8 db at 12 ghz and 13.8 db at 19.5 ghz.

fig. 4. schematic view of the reflectarray and the two feed horns in the symmetry plane (y=0).

the phase shift distributions required on the reflectarray to generate a collimated beam in the specified direction at 12 and 19.5 ghz are shown in fig. 5 for both polarizations. since the antenna is designed to provide the same radiation pattern for the two orthogonal components of the incident field, it will operate in dual circular polarization when illuminated by a dual cp polarized feed. this flexibility may be particularly useful for a multi mission space antenna, as most of ku band transponders operate in linear polarization, while circular polarization is commonly employed in ka band transponders.

(a) (b) fig. 5. required phases to be implemented on the reflectarray surface in h and v polarizations: (a) at 12 ghz, (b) at 19.5ghz. 3

the mom sd code is employed to obtain the appropriate lengths for each arrangement of dipoles, accounting for the real incidence angle in each cell. first, the required phases at 12 ghz are implemented by considering only the elements on layer a, i.e., the lengths la1 to la3 are varied to control h polarization, and the lengths la4 to la6 are varied to control v polarization. once the lower layer dimensions have been fixed, the required phases at 19.5 ghz are accomplished by adjusting the elements on layer b in a similar way: the lengths lb1 and lb2 are varied to control h polarization, and the lengths to control v polarization. this lb3 and step by step method simplifies the design of the antenna and reduces the cpu time. the single frequency design provides acceptable results for the radiation patterns at both design frequencies; however, an additional optimization has been run in order to correct residual phase errors and to ensure the required bandwidth in ku and ka bands. this process involves the fine tuning of the lengths previously calculated, with the aim of fitting not only the required phases at the central design frequencies, but also the phases at the extremes of both operating bands: 2 ghz bandwidth is enforced in ku band (11 13 ghz, 16%), and 1 ghz bandwidth in ka band (19 20 ghz, 5.2%). the dipoles in the direction of the x and y axes can be independently optimized due to the absence of coupling between the phases of the two orthogonal polarizations, thus simplifying the whole optimization process .

the designed reflectarray antenna has been manufactured and measured. an aluminum structure has been built to sustain the reflectarray, which includes an arm with methacrylate supports to fix the two feed horns. the two levels of printed dipoles are produced by conventional chemical photo etching process. the dipoles are printed on both sides of a diclad 880 substrate cladded with 17 μm copper. the dielectric layer with the printed dipoles has been bonded to an ad255c sheet backed by the ground plane by using a thermoplastic film (cuclad 6250). then, the antenna has been fixed to the aluminum supporting plate by means of nylon screws which are placed near the corners of the reflectarray surface.

the manufactured reflectarray antenna (see fig. 6) has been tested at the anechoic chamber of the university of seville, in a spherical near field measurement system. the dimensions of the printed dipoles were checked before the measurement of the antenna, and this test showed that there had been an averaged error of 50 μm in excess in all the lengths and widths of the dipoles of both layers, plus a random error of ±10 μm. this tolerance error was taken into account in the calculation of numerical radiation patterns, showing that it can lead to a reduction in gain of about 1 db in ka band frequencies, while the effects in ku band are almost negligible.

the comparison between the measured and simulated radiation patterns at 12 and 19.5 ghz is presented in figs. 7 and 8. the patterns show the cond cross polar components for the two linear polarizations in the principal planes: the one tilted 20º with respect to the z axis (azimuth) and the xz plane (elevation). the mom sd code has been used to calculate the tangential components of the reflected electric and magnetic fields on the reflectarray surface. then, the numerical radiation patterns have been derived from these components.

fig. 6. reflectarray prototype and measurement setup.

figure 7 shows a quite good agreement between experimental for v polarization at 12 ghz, although measured gain is 1.2 db lower than the simulated value obtained when using the nominal values of εr and tanδ at 10 ghz provided by the manufacturer. similar results are obtained for the other polarization and the other frequencies of ku band, although they are not shown here. however, the comparison between simulated and measured radiation patterns in ka band showed stronger disagreements than in ku band. it was checked that the tolerance errors in the lengths and widths of the dipoles (an average increment of 50μm) were not large enough to justify the differences. the bonding film (cuclad 6250 with εr = 2.32 and tanδ = 0.0013), which had been originally neglected in the design of the antenna because of its small thickness (38 μm), was also considered in the simulations by the inclusion of a new dielectric layer between layers a and b. as a result, slight differences were detected in the radiation patterns, but they were not sufficient to justify the difference between measured and simulated gain in ka band. in order to find the explanation for this disagreement, the dielectric constant and loss tangent of both substrates were measured by means of the technique described in . the results showed that the dielectric constant in ka band is always larger than the nominal values provided by the manufacturer. for ad255c, εra= 2.70 was measured, instead of εra = 2.55, and for diclad 880, εrb = 2.30 was measured, instead of εrb = 2.17. the measured loss tangent is also larger than the nominal values: tanδ close to 0.005 was measured for both substrates, instead of 0.0009. therefore, additional simulations were carried out by taking into account the measured values of permittivity and loss tangent of layers a and b. as a consequence, the corrected radiation patterns in ka band showed a better correspondence with experimental results, while the patterns in ku band presented a slight reduction in gain. the amplitude and phase response of the cell was also analyzed considering the corrected values of εr and tanδ, and the results are included in fig. 2, superimposed to the curves obtained with nominal values of εr and tanδ. as can be seen, the worst effects occur in ka band, where the losses can be several times larger than originally expected. moreover, significant phase errors appear in those elements with upper central dipoles larger than 5.5 mm, these errors being responsible for the deterioration of the radiation patterns. and simulated radiation patterns 4

finally, it has been found that there are a few cells near the edge of the reflectarray, for which the first higher order floquet mode starts propagating at higher frequencies, which is the condition for grating lobe appearance. we have modified our software tool to take into account the contribution of higher order floquet harmonics in the radiated field and we have analyzed again the antenna. the simulated corrected patterns considering the measured values of εr and tanδ and the effect of higher order floquet modes are shown in figs 7 and 8. a slightly and measurements (not included in the figures) was found after inclusion of higher order floquet modes. however, the main source of discrepancies between original simulations and measurements is not the excitation of grating lobes, but the difference between nominal and measured values of εr and tanδ in the materials. the bad initial estimation of the dielectric constant of the substrate layers shifted the antenna operation in the upper band to lower frequencies (from 19 20 ghz to around 18.5 19.5 ghz), while the higher measured loss tangent also had an effect on reducing the antenna gain, especially in ka band. the inclusion of the aforementioned correction factors in the simulations contributes to obtain a better agreement with the measurements, causing a reduction in gain and an increase of side lobes, as can be seen in the patterns.

figure 9 shows the evolution of gain with frequency in each polarization for both measurements and simulations, while considering the nominal values of εr and tanδ of the two dielectric materials, as well as the corrected values. as can be seen, there is a shift in the frequency response in ka band (the maximum gain is measured at 19 ghz, instead of at 19.5 ghz). it can be also observed that the manufactured demonstrator is wideband in the lower band (roughly 20% bandwidth for a gain variation smaller than 2 db) and narrowband in the upper band (around 5% bandwidth for a gain variation smaller than 2 db). moreover, the values of side lobe level (sll) and cross polar discrimination (xpd) of the antenna radiation patterns are summarized in table i for simulations and measurements. the radiation patters and antenna gain should be improved by using the real properties (extracted from measurements) of the materials at the operation frequencies in the design process. (a)

fig. 7. measured and simulated radiation patterns at 12 ghz for v polarization in (a) azimuth and (b) elevation planes.