please cite this article as: e. fantino, r.m. flores, m. di carlo, a. di salvo, e. cabot, geosynchronous inclined orbits for high latitude communications, acta astronautica (2017), doi: 10.1016/ j.actaastro.2017.09.014.

this is a pdf file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. as a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. the manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. geosynchronous inclined orbits for high latitude communications

e. fantino, r.m. flores, m. di carlo, a. di salvo, e. cabot

∗corresponding author: elena.fantino@gmail.com (e. fantino)

august 9, 2017 keywords: orbits, geosynchronous, perturbations, station keeping,

maneuvers, low thrust, disposal, communications presents the orbital evolution and station keeping corrections for only four spacecraft, and beyond 50◦ latitude using five spacecraft. presenting a disposal strategy at end of life concludes the analysis.

the end of life disposal plan. the conclusions are drawn in sect. 8.

2.1. coverage analysis: selection of eccentricity and inclination

λ3). a sample of such maps can be found in figs. 3 and 4. apocenter radii of the corresponding geosynchronous keplerian orbits.

the longitudes of interest, i.e., 100◦w, 10◦e or 100◦e. 4.1. choice of the expansion degree of the geopotential

e, inclination i, argument of perigee ω, longitude of the ascending node lan. figure 7: drift of the ascending node: sets 6 (top) and 7 (bottom). 6.1. correction of the longitude of the ascending node

∆lan of the longitude of the ascending node,

(6) degrees per orbit. 6.2. correction of the right ascension of the ascending node (7)

hand, is reduced from 9◦ to just 1◦ (a 90% decrease).

perigee which rotates the velocity vector by an angle γ [26, 27]: ∆ωi. (9)

(11) with respect to the perigee yields a variation in ω (12)

if β denotes the thrust elevation over orbital plane. left: effect of the maneuver on the argument of perigee ω.

of the perigee associated with the correction of ω:

6.3. correction of the argument of perigee drift

degrees per year when averaged across the six values of ω). ω = 290 m/s over two years. impulse can be found by solving the equation

1 2 sin 2 ¯e , (20) of the thrust arc. thrust vector is in the orbital plane. satellite is online for communication service.

i.e., in the part of the orbit reserved for telecommunication service. (cid:19)

(22) cending node is achieved by an impulse applied at either node:

6.6. estimation of total station keeping cost

the impulses required to correct these perturbations are ∆v i (cid:19)

by considering both impulsive and continuous thrust maneuvers. with the initial eccentricity, with a maximum of 586 m/s for e0 = 0.4.

altitude (second column). the first column gives the initial orbital eccentricity.

586 days and corresponds to a velocity variation of 780 m/s.

part, have ∆v requirements that are roughly twice as large. m/s (the maneuver taking almost a year to complete). telecommunications (estel), rome, italy, 2012.

national electric propulsion conference, wiesbaden, germany, 2011.