guest editorial special section on "indoor localization, tracking, and mapping with heterogeneous technologies"

p osition has always represented fundamental informa

tion in vehicular systems. accurate availability of poition opens the way to enhanced system performance and functionalities, such as automated guided vehicles and people movers. while satellite based positioning systems (generally referred to as global navigation satellite systems, namely gnss, including gps, glonass, and galileo) provide posiion information that is accurate enough for most applications in outdoor environments, they usually do not work well in close or harsh environments. therefore, other localization technologies must be considered. in some scenarios, such as inside buildings and unexplored caves, even the map of the environment might not be available. thus, the localization processes have to be executed in parallel to mapping [i.e., simultaneous localization and mapping (slam)], making the problem even more chalenging. different from outdoor applications and the reliance on gnss, for indoor applications, there is no single dominant technology that can meet a sufficiently wide range of requireents. as a result, a plethora of solutions has been investigated over the past decade. a current trend in indoor localization and tracking is to use a combination of standards, low cost, and already deployed technologies and resort to statistical fusion of the information they provide.

for people who work in the field of vehicular technology, it is strategically important to understand the potentialities and limitations of indoor positioning. unfortunately, most research on indoor positioning is widely scattered because it has been carried out by different communities ranging from robotics, sigal processing, and vehicular technology to computer science. this makes the distillation of key results difficult, particularly for those researchers who are new to this topic. this has motiated us to propose this special section on indoor localization, tracking, and mapping with heterogeneous technologies. the goal here is to bring contributions from different communities to a wide range of professionals in the vehicular technology community with the focus on the integration and fusion of indoor localization and mapping techniques. it is intended to facilitate the understanding of the technology, to identify future research and development directions, and to accelerate the adoption of the technology into real life.

we have received 51 paper submissions. we would like to take this opportunity to thank all authors for submitting their works to this special section. after thorough and careful reiews, followed by extensive discussions among guest editors and the editor in chief, we have accepted 12 papers for this special section.

the special section starts with the survey paper "indoor tracking: theory, methods, and technologies," authored by the guest editors. the paper introduces the general problems on indoor tracking and provides a comprehensive survey on main challenges, technologies, and the most advanced statistical tools that are available in the current literature.

the following three papers address the integration of meaurements coming from heterogeneous sensors with the purose of improving the localization accuracy.

specifically, in "integrated indoor navigation system for ground vehicles with automatic 3 d alignment and position initialization," atia et al. introduce an autonomous indoor navigation system based on the integration of inertial sensors, lidar, received signal strength from wireless local area netork (wlan) signals, odometry, and occupancy floor maps. the multisensor integration is performed by a multirate exended kalman filter and validated in an experimental setting with submeter accuracy. in "indoor positioning using ultraideband and inertial measurements," kok et al. propose a method for indoor positioning by combining measurements from accelerometers and gyroscopes with time of arrival meaurements from an ultrawideband system. they also present an algorithm for calibration of the ultrawideband system. it is shown that accurate position estimates can be obtained even in challenging settings with a large number of outliers. zampella et al., in "indoor positioning using efficient map matching, rss measurements and an improved motion model," present a foot mounted pedestrian dead reckoning system that integrates measurements from inertial sensors, received signal strength, map matching, and a motion model. this fusion is performed by a two level structure, including a particle filter in charge of the integration. the experimental results validate the approach, showing meter accuracy.

cooperation is one of the most effective methods to improve the performance and robustness of localization algorithms, paricularly when working under adverse propagation conditions. the paper by nguyen et al. entitled "least square cooperative localization" investigates the fundamental limits in cooperative localization in the presence of spatial randomness of network nodes and arbitrary ranging bias. the authors quantify the deviation of localization accuracy from the theoretical limit for different versions of the least squares (ls) algorithm. they also propose a simple distributed algorithm for ls cooperative localization. wu et al. propose, in "a time reversal paradigm for indoor positioning system," to use the unique multipath