haps based relaying for integrated space air ground networks with hybrid fso/rf communication: a performance analysis

swaminathan r , member, ieee department of electrical engineering, indian institute of technology (iit) indore, indore, india

shubha sharma school of computer science and engineering, nanyang technological university, singapore

narendra vishwakarma department of electrical engineering, indian institute of technology (iit) indore, indore, india

a s madhukumar , senior member, ieee school of computer science and engineering, nanyang technological university, singapore

optical wireless communication (owc) has garnered significant importance to provide gigabit capacity links owing to its unique features. free space optics (fso) communication, which is the term used for owc in an outdoor scenario, is a good candidate to establish ground to satellite/satellite to ground links. despite of many advanages, fso communication in uplink is limited by the adverse effects of beam wander, beam scintillation, and pointing errors. therefore, to counteract the limitations, it is wise to backup fso links with reliable radio frequency (rf) links. in addition, the complementary characeristics exhibited by fso and rf links to atmospheric effects have

manuscript received march 5, 2020; revised september 19, 2020; released for publication december 1, 2020. date of publication january 11, 2021; date of current version june 9, 2021.

refereeing of this contribution was handled by v. weerackody.

this work was supported in part by the start up research grant (srg) of science and engineering research board (serb), department of science and technology, govt. of india, and in part by the singapore ministry of education academic research fund tier 1 grants.

authors' addresses: swaminathan r and narendra vishwakarma are with the department of electrical engineering, indian institute of technology (iit) indore, indore 453552, india, e mail: (swamiramabadran@iiti.ac.in; phd1901102004@iiti.ac.in); shubha sharma and a s madhukumar are with the school of computer science and engineering, nanyang technoogical university, singapore 639798, e mail: (shubha002@ntu.edu.sg; asmadhukumar@ntu.edu.sg). (corresponding author: swaminathan r.) paved the way for hybrid fso/rf communication. in recent years, a growing interest is also witnessed in the research and development of space air ground integrated network (sagin). this article aims to fuse fso and rf technologies for integrated space air ground uplink networks utilizing unmanned aerial vehicle (uav), such as high altitude platform station (haps) as a relay station for achieving better reliability. thus, we propose single hop and sagin based dualop system models for uplink satellite communication with hybrid fso/rf links and the performance is investigated using analytical and simulation results. in summary, the results show that hybrid fso/rf systems perform better than the fso systems in an uplink scenario due to the backup rf link.

according to the natural disaster report , 396 natural disasters were recorded in 2019 with more than 95 million people affected across the world. in addition, it has also been reported that more than 40% of the total number of disasters occurred in asia. therefore, in order to prevent these disasters, it is important for india and other asian countries to deploy more satellites and increase the monioring frequency, observation area, and resolution of images obtained from the satellite. this necessitates the need for large communication capacity and reliable communication links in satellite communication (satcom) systems , which have opened a new chapter for space air ground integrated network (sagin) and optical space based communication . sagin is an integration of satellite system, terrestrial system, and aerial networks in order to achieve a large network topology for efficient sharing of global information. currently, most of the sagin links are operating in microwave radio frequency (rf) band. however, rf band has limited capacity and is also costly as most of the frequency bands are licensed. also, sagin demands high date rate connectivity due to the exchange of huge amount of data among space, air, and ground networks. thus, free space optics (fso) communication plays a key role in meeting the high data rate requirements.

in recent years, a growing interest has been witnessed in the research and development of establishing fso links between ground station (gs) and satellite, which can offer much larger data rates even up to terabits per second. therefore, it is high time to consider fso communication, which has attracted enough attention due to various advanages over rf communication, such as cheap installation cost with faster deployment, low power usage, high bandidth, heavily secured links, narrow laser beam enabling numerous fso links, etc., . fso refers to a line of sight (los) communication using optical carriers between two fixed points in the outdoor environment. advancement of space technology together with the sophisticated optical sources , and detectors opened a new chapter for fso based satcom. however, the performance of fso satcom links is mainly affected by beam scintillation, beam wander, and pointing errors, which result in frequent link failures , . beam scintillation and beam wander are atmospheric turbulence effects, which arise due to largecale inhomogeneities in the turbulent atmosphere. beam wander is caused by misalignment of the optical beam

1581 from the boresight because of the presence of turbulent eddies larger than the beam diameter. beam scintillation and beam wander lead to loss of signal to noise ratio (snr) at the receiver. in addition, pointing errors, which arises due to misalignment between transmit and receive apertures because of receiver mechanical vibration, is also a primary concern for fso communication. one efficient solution is to use rf link as a backup with fso link, as it is less affected by the aforementioned factors. this complementary behavior of fso and rf links to atmospheric effects has paved the way for hybrid fso/rf communication .

another option is to use the concept of relaying techique to counteract atmospheric effects to achieve furher improvement in the system performance . consequently, satcom system during uplink and downink requires a distributed architecture, where data are relayed from gs to relay and then finally forwarded to the satellite. unmanned aerial vehicles (uavs), such as high altitude platform station (haps), low altitude platorm station (laps), etc., can act as a relay station beween gs and satellite to enhance the performance of fso communication . uavs should be deployed well above the clouds in such a way that the atmospheric effects on an optical beam is less severe so that a strong los link exists between uav and satellite. haps is an aerial vehicle usually placed in the stratosphere between 17 and 32 km above sea level , where the existence of strong los link is possible between haps and satellite, which eventully improves the reliability of gs to satcom link. the main advantages of haps are easier and faster deployment than satellite, medium operational costs, easy maintenance, and environmental friendliness. haps is useful for many applications, such as astronomy, disaster monitoring, and ad hoc communication during disaster situations .

by deploying haps as a relay terminal, the gs toatellite uplink is split into two parts: 1) gs to haps and 2) haps to satellite. among the two links, gs to haps link is more sensitive to atmospheric effects. hence, it is mandatory to backup gs to haps fso link with rf links to enhance the link performance. it is also to be noted that haps will be located in a cloud free atmospheric altitude and reliability is not a major concern for haps to satellite link. therefore, we can restrict the link to fso communiation alone, as shown in fig. 1(b).

in prior works , , performance of a terrestrial switching based single hop hybrid fso/rf system was investigated over weak and strong atmospheric turbulence conditions considering log normal and gamma gamma fadng channels, respectively. in both works, the performance analysis was carried out without considering the effect of pointing errors. furthermore, dual hop relay assisted fso and hybrid fso/rf communication were investigated exensively for the terrestrial communication scenario in . in , the end to end performance of a dual hop fso communication was investigated over gamma gamma turbulence for a fixed gain relaying system. to validate the analytical performance of the dual hop fso system, a real state of the art optical hardware system was designed in . in , the performance of a switching based hybrid fso/rf decode and forward (df) relaying system was investigated considering maximal ratio combining at the destination. in , we considered a dual hop relaying scenario and optimization of fso link parameters was carried out for a hybrid fso/rf system to minimize the effect of pointing errors.

in , the performance analysis of a hybrid satellite terrestrial fso cooperative system was carried out using satellite rf link, which was modeled using shadowed rician distribution, and terrestrial fso link, which was modeled using gamma gamma distribution. similarly, in , an integrated satellite terrestrial relay network considering multiuser environment and threshold based df relaying was proposed. here, the satellite to relay link was modeled using shadowed rician distribution and the relayo user link was modeled using nakagami m distribution. thus, the proposed works in and investigated the performance of a hybrid satellite terrestrial relay system, where the gs receives the signal from the satellite and relays the signal to the destination node. it is to be noted that the gs acts as a relay node in and and fso link is used as a last mile connection from relay to destination node in . in the literature, only very few works are reported in case of single hop fso communication between gs and satellite , , and . on contrary, many works are reported considering rf communication between gs and satellite. recently, in , the double differential modulaion scheme for land mobile satellite communication was proposed to overcome the carrier frequency offset and the symbol error probability (sep) expressions were derived considering shadowed rician fading channels. the error performance of the double differential modulation system was compared with coherent modulation and single differntial modulation techniques. in addition, the effect of an elevation angle on the error performance was also studied. in , the performance analysis of fso based downlink satcom system with spatial diversity was carried out over gamma gamma fading channels by deriving closed form expression for outage probability. in , the bit errorate (ber) analysis was carried out for different modulaion schemes considering the uplink satcom system in the presence of atmospheric turbulence and beam wandernduced pointing errors. the atmospheric turbulence was modeled using gamma gamma distribution and the effect of channel anomalies on the ber performance of different intensity modulation schemes was reported. in , ber evaluation of various modulation schemes was performed for single hop fso based uplink and downlink satcom systems. in addition, the aperture averaging scheme was considered to enhance the performance of downlink satom system. in summary, the performance analysis of single hop rf based and fso based satcom systems was investigated in , and link reliability techiques were proposed in case of the fso based satcom system for the downlink scenario.

in , a laps based relaying system was proposed reently in which two laps serve as relay nodes between terestrial source and destination nodes. in the proposed article, rf transmission was assumed between laps and gs and fso transmission was assumed between two laps. based on the proposed system model, closed form expression for outage probability was derived. in , the performance of a multibeam very high throughput satellite system was carried out in which gs to satellite fso link was modeled using gamma gamma distribution and satellite to user rf link was assumed to follow shadowed rician distribution. a cooperative satellite aerial terrestrial downlink system based on rf communication was considered in with satellite, uav, and a group of terrestrial receivers serving as source, relay, and destination nodes. here, the coverage probability of relay to destination link and outage perforance of source to relay link was investigated considering a shadowed rician fading channel. recently, the outage performance analysis of ground to haps fso communiation was carried out in assuming log normal and gamma gamma atmospheric turbulence fading channels with pointing errors. furthermore, performance of a uavo satellite fso communication system was studied in and the effect of pointing error and atmospheric turbulence on the ber performance was reported using monte carlo simulations. recently, we investigated the average sep perormance of haps based hybrid fso/rf communication for the downlink scenario in assuming gamma gamma atmospheric turbulence and rician rf fading channels.

in order to meet the high data rate requirements of sain, a dual hop fso based uplink satcom architecture has been proposed in our current work. furthermore, to counteract the fso channel distortions and improve the netork performance between gs and haps, rf backup link is utilized, which leads to the development of haps based sagin architecture with hybrid fso/rf communication. the proposed architecture can be effectively applied in lots of fields, such as earth observation and mapping, intelligent transportation system, mission critical applications, disaser monitoring and rescue, etc., with better reliability and higher data rates compared to already existing fso based satcom architecture. in addition, the proposed architecure would bring lots of benefits for 5g and 6g wireless communication systems especially for enhanced mobile broadband (embb), big communications (bigcom), ultraeliable low latency communications (urllc), and threeimensional integrated communications (3d intecom) usge scenarios.

the main motivations of this article are as follows.

1) the performance analysis of hybrid fso/rf comunication was restricted mostly to terrestrial comunication in the literature.

2) in case of satcom systems, the performance analsis was carried out by assuming only fso link between gs and satellite.

3) the fso link reliability during an uplink scenario needs to be improved, as the link is prone to atospheric turbulence effects, pointing errors, and atmospheric attenuation due to various weather conitions. moreover, the previously proposed aperture averaging scheme also failed to improve the link performance for uplink case.

4) in prior works, performance of uav to satellite and ground to haps fso communication systems was investigated separately. furthermore, a comprehenive end to end performance analysis based on outge and average sep was also missing in the existing works.

5) also, uavs were used as relay nodes only between two terrestrial nodes in most of the existing works. in addition, only rf communication was considered for dual hop uav based relaying system for downlink satcom.

6) in our work , the fso based dual hop relaying satcom system was proposed using haps as a relay station and an rf backup link was used to

1583 support fso link for nullifying atmospheric turbuence effects. however, the analysis was restricted to the downlink scenario without considering the effect of pointing errors and atmospheric attenuation. furthermore, a closed form expression for average sep was obtained only for noncoherent detection technique assuming rician fading for rf commuication. also, an asymptotic analysis to obtain full diversity gain from both fso and rf links was not carried out.

in a nutshell, the overall status of the research works has

the major contributions of this article are as follows.

1) in current article, single hop and sagin based dualop system models considering haps as a relay station with hybrid fso/rf communication have been proposed for the uplink scenario to counteract the limitations of fso communication. the perforance of sagin based dual hop system is reported using single hop fso and hybrid fso/rf systems as benchmark.

2) end to end average sep and outage analyses of the hybrid systems have been carried out over gamma gamma distribution in the presence of atmospheric turbulence, attenuation, and pointing errors for fso communication and shadowed rician distribution for rf communication.

3) unified average sep and asymptotic sep expresions are derived in closed form assuming both intensity modulation/direct detection (im/dd) and heterodyne detection techniques.

4) asymptotic analysis to obtain full diversity gain from both fso and rf links has been carried out and the performance and diversity gains obtained due to the presence of rf link have been reported for various scenarios.

the effect of beam wander induced pointing errors is negligible in case of downlink signals from satellite, as the beam size when reaches the atmosphere is much larger than the turbulent eddy size. however, if the turbulent eddy size is larger than the transmitter beam size, then the effect of beam wander, which induces pointing error, should be taken into consideration. thus, beam wander induced pointing errors has been taken into consideration inside a large scale scatering parameter in case of the uplink satcom scenario.

d. organization of the article

the article is organized as follows. in section ii, system and channel models have been discussed. the performance analysis of the proposed system models, which include outage, average sep, and diversity order analyses, is given in section iii. in section iv, numerical results and related discussions are given for various scenarios. finally, secion v concludes this article.

ii. system and channel models

a. system model

in our proposed article, we consider two system models. first we consider a single hop communication scenario between gs and low earth orbit (leo) satellite, as shown in fig. 1(a). second, we consider sagin comprising of a gs, a haps based relay node, and a leo satellite, as shown in fig. 1(b). in case of single hop communication, we consider both fso and rf links between gs and satelite with higher priority to fso link. for sagin based dual hop communication, both fso and rf transmission between haps and gs and only fso transmission between satellite and haps have been considered. an erroneous df relaying based satcom system is assumed in our work. the reason for considering df relaying is that in case of amplify and forward (af) relaying, the relay node amplifies the received message signal and, then, forwards the amplified version to the destination node. however, the noise together with the signal is also amplified, which is the main disadvantage of the af relaying scheme. while a conventional df scheme can completely eliminate noise at the relay, the relay can make perfect detection. furthermore, the performance analysis framework in our work is focused on the df relaying owing to the ease of implementation and the popularity of the df scheme among the researchers and developers of proof of concept. it is to be noted that in a ul scenario, gs and leo satellite will act as a source (s) node and a destination (d) node, respectively. furthermore, haps will act as a relay (r) node.

the atmospheric channel state in case of fso comunication and flat fading rf channel gain over sourceo destination link are denoted as isd and hsd, respecively. moreover, the channel state over source to relay and relay to destination fso links are denoted as isr and ird, respectively. similarly, the flat fading rf channel gain over source to relay link is denoted as hsr. the system model in case of single hop communication is straightforward, where source (i.e., gs) transmits to destination (i.e., satellite), respectively, over fso or rf links based on the channel conditions. the proposed system model in case of dual hop communication adopts two phase orthogonal transmission, where source (i.e., gs) transmits to relay (i.e., haps) over fso or rf link based on the channel conditions during the first phase. after that relay decodes, re encodes, and forards the message signal to destination (i.e., leo satellite) during second phase.

we consider an fso subsystem with subcarrier intensity modulation based m ary phase shift keying (sim mpsk) at the transmitter. furthermore, both direct detection and heterodyne detection techniques are assumed at the destiation in case of fso subsystem. in an optical sim psk system, the data sequence is first modulated using an elecrical modulator considering mpsk scheme, which can be easily implemented with existing microchips. the mpsk signal is then up converted to an intermediate frequency and the up converted signal modulates the intensity of the laser beam. at the transmitter of the rf subsystem, the data sequence is modulated using the mpsk signaling scheme. the hardware implementation of the hybrid system will also be easier in case of usage of the same modulation scheme for both rf and fso subsystems in an electrical domain. it is to be noted that direct detection, which is a noncoherent detection technique, is assumed as the main mode of detection in fso subsystem. however, heterodyne detection, which is a coherent detection technique, has also been considered as an alternative detection scheme.

the switching scheme for both single hop and dual hop scenarios is described as follows: if the instantaneous snr of fso link at the receiver is above a particular fso threshold snr value γ f t , then fso link will be used for transmission. however, if the instantaneous snr drops below γ f t , then the receiver sends a 1 b feedback signal to activate the rf subsystem and the information signal will be transmitted over rf link. meanwhile, the fso subsystem will be put on a standby mode. note that the transmitter does not need the exact channel state information (csi) of fso link. as the fso channel varies on the order of millions of symbol intervals , it is not required to monitor the snr of fso link at regular intervals unlike rf system to send the feedback signal.

in satcom based fso communication, the optical beam when propagating through the atmosphere will enounter various kinds of atmospheric effects and they are given as follows , : 1) free space loss, 2) atmospheric turbulence effects, 3) pointing errors, and 4) attenuation due to weather conditions. all the aforementioned effects are taken into consideration in our system model.

the complex baseband signal received at the destination node from the source node over single hop fso link during uplink transmission is given by (cid:2)

where fl denotes the free space loss and is given by fl = 4π l λ , λ denotes the wavelength of fso signal, l deotes the transmission distance between gs and satellite, b = 1 and 2 for heterodyne and direct detection schemes, respectively, f indicates the transmission over fso link, ηsd denotes the optical to electrical conversion coefficient, p f g indicates the transmit power of fso at gs, g f t g denotes the transmit telescope gain at gs, g f rs denotes the receive telescope gain at leo satellite, n f sd denotes the additive white gaussian noise (awgn) at the destination, which is a widely accepted model for optical wireless system , and symbol s belongs to the mpsk constellation. it is to be noted that isd = i l sd is the product of atmospheric transmittance or atmospheric attenuation due to varying weather conditions i l sd, and pointing errors i p sdi p sdi a

sd, atmospheric turbulence i a

for a dual hop scenario, the complex baseband signal received at the relay node from the source node over fso link is given by (cid:2)

g g f t g g f p f fp where the free space loss fp is given by fp = 4π lp λ , lp denotes the transmission distance between gs and haps, sri p isr = i l sr denotes the awgn at the relay during fso transmission, and g f rh denotes the receive telescope gain at haps. after decoding the information signal at the relay, the decoded symbol ˆs will be forwarded to the destination and the received complex baseband signal at the destination over fso link is given by y f sr rh

where ird = i a h indicates transmit power of fso at haps, free space loss fs is given by fs = 4π ls λ , ls denotes the transmission distance between haps and satellite, and n f rd denotes the awgn at the destination during fso transmission. since haps will be usually deployed in a cloud free atmospheric altitude, the atmospheric attenuaion due to varying weather condition i l rd will be almost equal to unity, and hence, the same has been ignored in (3). in case of a single hop scenario, the received complex baseband signal at the destination over rf link is given by

where r indicates the transmission over rf link, pr the transmit rf power at gs, gr from gs to satellite, and nr destination during rf transmission. g indicates sd is the pathloss of rf link sd denotes the awgn at the

in case of dual hop transmission, the received complex

baseband signal at the relay over rf link is given by (cid:4)

sr s + nr g gr pr sr

where gr and nr transmission. sr is the pathloss of rf link from gs to haps sr denotes the awgn at the relay node during rf

from the received complex baseband signals, the instananeous snr expression for source to destination and (2)

1585 source to relay fso links assuming both heterodyne and direct detection schemes are, respectively, given by (ηsd p f

t g g f g g f (fl )b(σ f sd)2 t g g f g g f rh isr)b (fp)b(σ f sr)2 the instantaneous snr expression for relay to destination fso link is given by

where (σ f i j )2 denotes the noise variance of awgn channel over fso link and i j ∈ {sd, sr, rd}. now the correspondng average snr expressions are given by

where a0 is the fraction of total power collected at the receiver aperture, ζi j is the pointing errors parameter or coefficient, and ki j = ζ 2

similarly, the instantaneous and average snr expresions for rf link from the baseband signal are, respectively, given by

where kl ∈ {sd, sr}, (σ r kl )2 denotes the noise variance of awgn channel over rf link, (cid:9)kl = e[|hkl |2] indicates the average power of los and non los (nlos) or scattered components, and e[·] denotes the expectation operator. the noise variance is given by (σ r kl )2 = pn nf , where nf denotes the noise figure of the receiver, pn (db) = kdb + tn + bw, bw denotes the receiver noise bandwidth (in dbhz), tn indicates the system noise temperature (in dbk), and kdb is boltzmann's constant, which is equal to −228.6 dbw/k/hz. the pathloss of rf link gr kl is given by , (13)

kl [db] = gt + gr − lf − lr − la − lo gr where gt indicates the transmit antenna gain (in db), gr inicates the receive antenna gain (in db), lf denotes the freepace loss (in db) and is given by lf = 92.45 + 20 log fr + 20 loglp for a source to relay link (gs to haps) sceario, lf = 20 log( 4π l ) for source to destination (gs tor satellite), λr denotes the wavelength of rf signal, fr deotes the rf frequency in ghz, lp denotes the transmission distance between gs and haps (in km), lr denotes the rain attenuation in db/km, la denotes the gaseous atmosphere loss, and lo denotes the other fading or miscellaneous fso channel: the atmospheric turbulence induced fadng or the fluctuations in received optical irradiance i a i j is modeled using gamma gamma distribution, which is used to characterize moderate to strong atmospheric turulence condition. we have used gamma gamma distriution due to its wide acceptance in the current literaure , , , , , , . it is a doublytochastic scintillation model, where the received optical irradiance i a i j is considered as a product of two independent gamma random variables, which represent the intensity fluctuations due to smallnd large scale turbulence. the probability density function (pdf) of i a i j is given by [5, eq. (2)]

(14) where αi j and βi j are the large scale and small scale turulence parameters of the scattering environment, respecively, kv (·) indicates the modified bessel function of secnd kind of order v [39, eq. (8.407.1)], and (cid:7)(·) is the gamma integral function [39, eq. (8.310.1)]. the expresions to calculate αi j and βi j for satcom links are given in appendix b. the attenuation due to pointing error can ≈ a0 exp(− 2r2 be expressed as i p leq )2 ), where r0 indicates 0 i j (w i j the radial displacement between beam center and detector center and is modeled using rayleigh distribution and w i j leq is the equivalent beam waist at the receiver . now, the pdf of pointing errors i p

the attenuation due to path loss or atmospheric transmitance for source to destination and source to relay fso links are determined using beers lambert law , l = exp(− = and are given by i l 0 exp(− σ (z).dz), respectively, and σ (z) is the atmopheric attenuation coefficient, which depends on the propgation distance. it is to be noted that modtran 4.0 simulations will give the measure of atmospheric transittance. the combined pdf of atmospheric channel state of fso link ii j = i l i j can be written in terms of meijer g function gm,n p,q (·) using [34, eq. (07.34.03.0605.01)] [i.e., using (48)] and is given by [33, eq. (1)] (cid:6)

(16) the pdf of the instantaneous snr of fso links can be obained from (16) using the power transformation of random variable and the resultant unified pdf expression is given (15)

. ={ ζ 2 i j = { ζ 2 , . . . , αi j +b−1 i j b rf channel: in this article, we consider shadowedician distribution, which fits very well for modeling satom links . it is a generalized rf fading channel model that includes rayleigh and rician distribution as special cases , . in case of shadowed rician fading model, the amplitude of the los component is assumed to be random unlike rician model and it finds potential applicaions in different frequency bands, such as the uhf band, c band, l band, s band, and ka band . the lowpassquivalent complex envelope of the shadowed rician fadng channel model can be written as follows : hkl (t ) = a(t )exp( jα(t )) + z (t )exp( jζ0), where j2 = −1, α(t ) is the stationary random phase process, which follows uniform distribution over [0, 2π ), and ζ0 indicates the deterministic phase of the los component. note that the stationary independent random processes z (t ) and a(t ) denote the amplitude of los and nlos components and they follow nakagami m and rayleigh distributions, respectively. now the shadowed rician pdf of envelope of fading channel gain hkl (i.e., |hkl |) is given by1 [35, eq. (2.67)]

where 1f1(·; ·; ·) is the confluent hypergeometric funcion , 2b1 is the average power of nlos components, (cid:9)1 is the average power of los component, and 0 ≤ m1 ≤ ∞ is the nakagami m fading severity parameter.

applying power transformation of random variable in (19) using (12), we obtain the pdf of instantaneous snr of rf link, which is given by (cid:9)kl α1 (cid:7)r kl

1for simplicity without loss of generality, we are not using the index t in our derivation. m1 = ∞, the norm of hkl (i.e., |hkl |) follows rayleigh and rician distributions, respectively. the cdf of γ r kl using kummer transformation [41, eq. (12)] is given by

iii. performance analysis

in this section, we perform the outage and error analyses of single hop and dual hop satcom systems and derive the closed form expressions for outage and average sep. in addition, asymptotic outage and average sep expressions are also derived to obtain the diversity gain of the proposed system models.

a. outage analysis of single hop satcom

the single hop hybrid fso/rf based satcom will be in outage, when both fso and rf links are lesser than their respective threshold values γ f t , respectively. hence, the outage probability is given by t and γ r

where the cdfs of fso and rf links are given by (18) and (21), respectively.

b. outage analysis of dual hop satcom

the dual hop satcom system with hybrid fso/rf and fso links will not be in outage if both the links are above their respective threshold values. so, the probability that the system will be in outage is given by sr )(1 − pout − pout sr pout rd pout dh

where individual terms are given by pout rd (γ r pout sr (γ f

c. error analysis of single hop satcom = fγ f

the conditional sep of mpsk signaling conditioned on the instantaneous snr of a given link can be written as [13, eq. (14)]

a 2 where a = 1 when modulation order m=2, i.e., binary phase shift keying (bpsk), a = 2 when m > 2, b = sin(π/m ), and erfc(·) denotes the complementary error function. using the relation between erfc(·) and meijer g function [34, eq. (07.34.03.0619.01)] [i.e., using (47)], the conditional sep can also be written in terms of meijer p(e/γi j ) = γi jb erfc (24)

1587 the conditional sep can also be expressed in terms of maclaurin series expansion [39, eq. (3.321)] and is given by

the average sep of single hop satcom considering hyrid fso/rf links is given by

t ) denotes the average sep of sh fso link t , fγ f t ) indicates the outage probability sd denotes the average sep of single hop

now (29) is divided into two terms i1 and i2(γ f t ). the deailed derivation of i1 and i2(γ f t ) is given in appendix c. the outage probability of fso subsystem, which is denoted by (γ f fγ f t ), considering a single hop scenario can be obtained from (18).

after substituting (20) and (24) in (30), 1f1(·; ·; ·) is exanded in terms of kummer transformation [41, eq. (12)] and, then, using integration by parts, the integral in (30) is simplified to obtain the final expression as as per the proposed system model for the dual hop scenario, if the instantaneous snr of fso link between source (i.e., gs) and relay (i.e., haps) is above a threshold snr value, then fso link will be used for transmission. if the instantaneous snr is less than a threshold value, then rf link will be used for transmission between source and relay. furthermore, only fso link will be used between relay and destination (i.e., leo satellite). now the average sep of source to relay to destination link is obtained by averaging the conditional sep of source to relay to destination link over the pdfs of instantaneous snr of source to relay and relay to destination links based on the conditions γ f > γt sr and γ f < γt , which is given by (32) (refer to the top of sr next page), where p f rd) is the conditional sep of sr source to relay to destination link conditioned on γ f sr and γ f rd. furthermore, pr rd) is the conditional sep of sr source to relay to destination link conditioned on γ r sr and γ f rd. the conditional sep of fso based source to relay and relay to destination links assuming m ary signaling can be written as [42, eq. (21)] esrd(γ f , γ f

similarly, the conditional sep of rf based source toelay and fso based relay to destination links assuming m ary signaling can be written as [42, eq. (21)]

after substituting (33) and (34) in (32), the average sep of dual hop satcom can be written as

where b f rd denotes the average sep of relay to destination fso link, b f sr(γt ) indicates the average sep of source toelay fso link when γ f > γt , and br sr indicates the average sr sep of source to relay rf link. from (35), the average sep can be written as

where ¯perd = b f rd, which is obtained from (57) by replacng dsd, fsd, and esd with drd, frd, and erd, respectively. note that ¯pesr in (36) is the average sep of hybrid fso/rf link, which is given by

(37) the asymptotic expressions for outage and average sep have also been derived in a closed form to obtain the diversity gain of single hop and dual hop systems. the asymptotic outage probability expression for the single hop hybrid fso/rf satcom system when (cid:7) f → ∞ is given sd by

where e i,x i j (39), it is observed that paout sd , βsd min( posed single hop satcom system is given by g1 = vsd.

similarly, the asymptotic outage probability expression

for dual hop satcom system can be obtained as

for the single hop hybrid fso/rf satcom system, the asymptotic expression for average sep ¯pesd, when (cid:7) f

(γ f t ) is given by sd(γ f ba f the closed form asymptotic expressions for i a are given in appendix c.

sd for a given average snr of rf link is constant and will not affect the diversity gain. sd)−vsd. thus, the from (41), it is observed that ¯pa diversity gain g1 of single hop hybrid fso/rf satcom system for a constant average snr of rf link is given by g1 = vsd.

similar to the single hop system, we can also obtain the diversity gain of the sagin based dual hop system. the end to end asymptotic expression for the sagin based dual hop system is given by the asymptotic sep expression for ¯perd when (cid:7) f → ∞ rd is given by (60) by replacing fsd, e i,x sd, and dsd with frd, e i,x rd, and drd, respectively. the asymptotic sep expression for hybrid fso transmission over source to relay link, i.e., esr when (cid:7) f → ∞ is obtained similar to (41) by replacing ¯pa the appropriate source to destination fso link parameters with source to relay fso link parameters and can be written as sr

sr(γt ) + fγ asy it is observed from the derived expression that ¯pesrd ∝ sr)−vsr. thus, the diversity gain g2 of sagin based ((cid:7) f dual hop uplink system is given by g2 = vsr. ¯pa esr t ) br sr .

note that the asymptotic analysis has been carried out for a fixed average snr value of rf link and under the condition that the average snr of fso link alone tending to infinity. hence, only performance gain due to rf link has been obtained and the diversity gain obtained from hybrid fso/rf system remains the same as that of the fso system. the asymptotic analysis for the scenario when both the average snr of rf and fso links tending to infinity is given as follows: the asymptotic average sep of rf link is kl , where kl ∈ {sr, rd}, obtained under the condition that (cid:7)r tends to infinity. after applying [43, eq. (4.1.18)], high snr approximations, and considering only the dominant term in (30), the final simplified asymptotic sep expression is given by

sd in (44) and (41), i j, the diversity gain 2 for single hop and dual hop satcom + 1, αsd + 1) and b + 1). it is to be noted that g(cid:4) 1 and min( g(cid:4) 2 are the highest/full diversity gain values that can be obtained from the proposed single hop and dual hop system models. ζ 2 sd b + 1, βsd b

iv. numerical results and discussions

the parameters assumed in our simulation studies are shown in table ii , . as the link between haps and satellite is not very sensitive to channel distortions, we assume (cid:7) f sr, very weak turbulence and negligible pointing errors scenario (i.e., ζrd = 13.07). moreover, for simplicity, we assume θ = θp = θs = θh , where θs and θh are the zenith angles that indicate the angle between the zenith and the propagation orientation from haps to satellite and gs to haps, respectively. similarly, θp denotes the angle between the zenith and the propagation orientation from gs to satellite. however, we have relaxed the equal zenith angle assumption in fig. 8. also, we have assumed an im/dd scheme in our simulation studies except fig. 8. the summation limits in (59) and (61) are truncated to k = 50 and n = 10, as k > 50 and n > 10 do not have an impact on the fifth decimal figure of the sep values. furthermore, = 5 × (cid:7) f

1589 the typical range of haps altitude adopted for simulation is 20 km, as shown in table ii. it is motivated by the facts that are given as follows.

1) the atmospheric turbulence effects on an optical beam is less severe at the height of 20 km than directly above ground.

2) as wind speed is very less in these altitudes, haps requires only less power to maintain its position. 3) large coverage area for telecommunications is posible at these altitudes.

4) haps is situated above normal commercial airline traffic.

the commercial planes usually operate at an altitude much lower than the altitude of haps. we assume highly directional lightweight horn antenna at haps relay staion . a circular polarization either right hand circular polarization or left hand circular polarization is used . in fig. 2, the variation of average sep of hybrid fso/rf system with respect to switching threshold snr γt is shown for different values of average snr of rf links (cid:7)r sr assumng heavy shadowing, w = 21m/s, θ = 80◦, and modulation order m = 4. it is noticed that the average sep value is minimum at γt = [−2 2 5 7 8] db for (cid:7)r = [0 5 10 15 sr 20] db. in addition, the optimal threshold value remains same irrespective of the average snr of fso links. the optimum threshold snr values γ opt are the corresponding γ f t values for which the average sep performance curve reaches minimum. it is inferred that with the availability of better rf link (i.e., rf link with high average snr), the optimum switching threshold snr γ opt to switch from fso to rf link also increases. the main reason behind this fig. 2. average sep versus threshold snr for different values of average snr of rf link.

fig. 3. performance of different system models for the uplink scenario.

phenomenon is given as follows: when the average snr value of rf link increases or when the quality of available rf link is good, then to achieve minimum sep, the optimum threshold value should increase. this is because, as the optimum threshold value increases, the fso system will be in outage frequently and rf link will be used with higher probability, which in turn improves the overall performance by nullifying the fso channel distortions. therefore, when the average snr of rf link is constant, then irrespective of the average snr of fso link, the optimum threshold value should remain same to achieve minimum average sep.

in fig. 3, the average sep performance comparison of single hop fso system, single hop hybrid fso/rf system, dual hop fso system, and dual hop hybrid fso/rf sysem with respect to average snr of fso links is shown assuming average shadowing, zenith angle θ = 80◦, wind velocity w = 21 m/s, γ f = γ opt = 5 db, where t t kl ∈ {sr, sd}. first, it is observed that the analytical reults match exactly with the monte carlo simulations and performance deteriorates with increase in m as expected. the hybrid fso/rf system (both single hop and dual hop) performs better than the fso system with a performance gain of more than 5 db at the sep value of 10−2 with = 5 db). a moderate average snr of rf link (i.e., (cid:7)r i j , and (cid:7)r kl thus, increase in the performance gain is obtained due to the backup rf link. most importantly, it has been oberved that the dual hop fso system performs better than the single hop fso system with a performance gain of 4 db. in addition, the dual hop hybrid system performs better than the single hop hybrid system with a performance gain of around 2 db. thus, significant improvement in the sep performance and diversity gain have been obtained by deploying haps for the uplink scenario. as fso link is prone to beam wander induced pointing errors in case of the uplink scenario, the deployment of haps helps in counteracting the pointing errors. moreover, the diversity improvement is due to the following reason: with decrease in link distance due to deployment of haps in case of the dual hop scenario compared to the single hop scenario, the rytov variance decreases and the smallnd large scale turbulence parameters increases. since the diversity order depends on the turbulence parameters, improvement in diersity gain is obtained in case of the dual hop scenario compared to the single hop scenario.

in addition, the performance improvement of the dualop scenario with haps compared to the single hop sceario is also due to the following reason: in case of the uplink scenario, the fso signal first travels from gs to haps, which is highly sensitive to both beam scintillation and misalignment errors, as the beam size of the fso signal is much smaller than the turbulent eddy size in the atmosphere. at haps, both the atmospheric turbulence effects and pointing errors are nullified, and then, the fso signal is forwarded to satellite. for the single hop scenario, both the turbulence effects are not nullified, as haps is not utilized. hence, the fso signal suffers from loss of snr and pointing errors in case of the uplink scenario and the utilization of haps leads to better system performance in case of the dual hop system compared to the single hop system.

however, no improvement in the performance of the dual hop system is noticed compared to the single hop system for the downlink scenario, as shown in fig. 4. this is due to the fact that in the case of the downlink scenario, the optical signal undergoes less attenuation when it travels fig. 5. sep performance of hybrid systems considering different values of average snr of rf link.

fig. 6. sep performance of hybrid satcom systems considering different zenith angle values.

from satellite to haps, as satellite to haps link is less prone to varying weather conditions. thus, it suffers low beam divergence till it reaches the height at which the haps is stationed. when the optical signal travels from haps to gs during the orthogonal phase, it enters the high attenuation region and suffers high beam divergence, which will be approximately same as that of the beam diverence encountered by the optical signal during single hop downlink transmission. thus, no performance improvement is achieved due to haps in case of dual hop system with respect to single hop system unlike the uplink scenario. hence, we are mainly interested in the trends of the uplink scenario compared to the downlink scenario in our proposed work. the expression to calculate large scale turbulence parameter αi j is different for the downlink scenario and the same is given in [9, eq. (9)].

in fig. 5, the sep performances of single hop and dualop hybrid systems are shown for different values of average snr of rf link and shadowing severity. it is inferred that increase in average snr of rf link (from 5 to 10 db) and decrease in shadowing severity improve the performance of single hop and dual hop hybrid systems.

in fig. 6, the sep performances of single hop and dual hop hybrid fso/rf system are shown for two different

1591 values of zenith angle θ assuming light shadowing, (cid:7)r sr (cid:7)r . it is observed from the performance that decrease in the zenith angle improves the sep performance. note that with decrease in zenith angle, the rytov variance decreases and the smallnd large scale turbulence parameters (i.e., αi j and βi j) increases. as the diversity order of the proposed system depends on αi j and βi j, significant improvement in the sep performance in terms of diversity gain is obtained with decrease in zenith angle. otherwise, the propagation distance of the optical beam increases with increase in the zenith angle leaving it more vulnerable to free space loss, atmospheric turbulence, beam wander, atmospheric attenuation due to varying weather conditions, pointing errors, and rf fading effects, compared to the scenario with low zenith angle value. therefore, significant degradation in the performance is noticed with increase in a zenith angle value. since the diversity gain of the system also depends on atmospheric turbulence and pointing errors parameters, increase in an zenith angle also affects the diversity gain of the system.

however, the performance gain of dual hop and singleop hybrid fso/rf systems compared to fso systems deteriorate with decrease in the zenith angle. as shown in the figure, performance gain value of more than 5 db is obtained from a hybrid system compared to the fso system for the case when θ = 80◦. however, the sep performances of fso and hybrid fso/rf systems are almost equal for θ = 40◦, as shown in fig. 6. thus, the backup rf link helps in enhancing the reliability for the worst case scenario with high zenith angle values. it is also noticed that the asymptotic sep values almost match the exact sep values in the high snr region for the case when the average snr of rf link remains constant, which validates the fact that the diversity order of the proposed system is min( b ), where i j = {sr} and i j = {sd} for dual hop and singleop scenarios, respectively.

similarly, asymptotic sep curve almost matches the exact sep curve in the high snr region for the case when the average snr of rf link also varies with the average = (cid:7) f snr of fso link (i.e., (cid:7)r sd) assuming a single hop sd hybrid fso/rf system. thus, it is inferred that full diversity gain due to both fso and rf links, which is equal to + 1), can be obtained for the case min( when the average snr of rf link also varies with the average snr of fso link under the condition γ f = γ opt . t t furthermore, if the average snr of rf link is constant, then only performance gain will be obtained due to the backup rf link and the diversity gain of hybrid fso/rf system will be equal to diversity gain of the fso system. this is because, for the case when the average snr of rf link (cid:7)r sd is constant, the optimum switching threshold snr value γ opt is also fixed. furthermore, for a high snr region t (i.e. (cid:7) f >> γ opt ), it is least likely that the instantaneous sd snr of fso link γ f and the fso link will be active most of the time. therefore, only fso link contributes to the diversity gain of the hybrid fso/rf fig. 7. sep performance of fso and hybrid satcom systems considering different values of wind velocity.

fig. 8. sep performance of fso and hybrid satcom systems considering different values of pointing errors coefficient.

system. however, for the case when (cid:7)r sd also varies with (cid:7) f sd, the optimum switching threshold also increases with sd as inferred from fig. 2. so the probability that γ f (cid:7)r sd falls below increasing γ opt or the probability of usage of rf link is higher compared to the previous case especially in the high snr region. thus, both fso and rf links contribute in the diversity gain of the hybrid fso/rf system, which validates the derived full diversity gain. t

the sep performances of the dual hop fso and hybrid fso/rf systems are compared for different val = 5 db, θ = 80◦, ues of w assuming heavy shadowing, (cid:7)r sr γ f , and m = 2. it is inferred from the figure that t increase in wind velocity w degrades the performance of both fso and hybrid fso/rf systems. this is due to the fact that the increase in wind velocity increases the foration of vortexes in air. this phenomenon will effectively change the refractive index of the medium, which will cause beam wander induced pointing errors and higher fluctuaions in the received signal amplitude. thus, degradation in the average sep performance is observed from the trends. most importantly, it is also observed that the wind velocity impacts the performance of the fso system to a greater extent compared to the hybrid fso/rf system. hence, a in fig. 7,

= γ opt t fig. 9. probability of usage of rf/fso link for different values of zenith angle.

reliable rf backup link has reduced the impact of the wind velocity on the system performance.

fig. 8 shows the effect of pointing errors on the dualop satcom system performance by varying the pointng errors coefficient ζsr assuming a heterodyne detec = 10 db, θh = 80◦, θs = 40◦, tion scheme, ζrd = 6, (cid:7)r sr γ f , m = 2, and light shadowing scenario. since t the zenith angle values are different for haps to satellite and gs to haps links, the assumption of haps being in a straight line path from gs to satellite is relaxed for this scenario. the performance is shown for three different values of ζsr, which are given by ζsr = 1, 1.8, and 5.2. it is noticed that the severity of pointing errors is high for lower values of ζsr. in addition, as haps to satellite fso link is less sensitive to pointing errors, high value of pointing errors coefficient is assumed in our simulations. from fig. 8, it is observed that to achieve the average sep value of 10−3, the performance gain values obtained using the dual hop hybrid fso/rf satcom system over the dual hop fso satcom system are 10 db, 5 db, and 3.5 db for ζsr = 1, 1.8, and 5.2, respectively. thus, it is observed that the backup rf link provides better performance gain when the severity of pointing errors is high. furthermore, improvement in the performance of the heterodyne detecion scheme is noticed due to its coherent detection nature as compared to the im/dd scheme.

it is to be noted that the hybrid fso/rf system provides much better performance gain under the conditions with high pointing errors, more propagation distance (i.e., high zenith angle value), and high wind velocity as compared to low pointing errors, less propagation distance, and low wind velocity conditions as discussed before. this is because, the probability of usage of the rf link is high when the fso link is more prone to channel distortions. furthermore, the probability of switching to rf link is comparatively less or the probability of usage of the fso link is high under the conditions with less fso channel distortions. hence, high performance gain due to the backup rf link is observed. the above inferences are also justified from the trends shown in figs. 9 and 10 using probability of usage of the fso or rf fig. 10. probability of usage of rf/fso link for different values of pointing errors coefficient.

fig. 11. sep performance of dual hop fso and hybrid satcom systems assuming different weather conditions.

link. here, the probability of usage of rf and fso links is evaluated from the outage and nonoutage probabilities of the fso link, respectively. from both the figures, it has been observed that the probability of usage of the rf link is higher for the scenarios with high pointing errors and zenith angle values compared to the scenarios with low pointing errors and zenith angle values especially for average snr values greater than 5 db.

in fig. 11, the average sep plots of dual hop satcom system with respect to fso transmit power are shown for various weather conditions. here, we consider three scenarios of weather conditions (i.e., clear air, thin or light fog, and moderate fog) for both dual hop fso and hybrid fso/rf satcom systems. the parameters assumed in the simulations are listed in table ii. in addition, the rf = 40 dbm. transmit power assumed in our simulations is pr g furthermore, the atmospheric transmittance values i sr for clear air, thin or light fog, and moderate fog conditions according to modtran 4.0 simulations based on visibility are assumed as 0.9, 0.52, and 0.15, respecively. it is observed that the dual hop hybrid satcom system performs better under all scenarios compared to dual hop fso system due to the backup rf link. the performance gain offered by the hybrid fso/rf system l

1593 fig. 12. outage performance comparison of different system models.

over fso system to achieve the average sep of 10−4 is found to be around 4 dbm. interestingly, it is also inferred that the dual hop hybrid fso/rf system under the moderate fog scenario performs slightly better than the dual hop fso system under the light fog scenario. similarly, imrovement in the performance is also observed in case of dual hop hybrid fso/rf system under the light fog sceario compared to the dual hop fso system under clear air scenario.

in fig. 12, the outage performance comparison of diferent system models with respect to average snr of fso links is shown assuming average shadowing, zenith angle θ = 80◦, wind velocity w = 21m/s, and γ f = 5 db t for different values of average snr of rf links. it is oberved from the plots that the theoretical outage probability values exactly match with the simulated outage values. it is also noticed from the outage performance curves that the hybrid fso/rf systems performs better than the fso systems. hence, the backup rf link also helps in improvng the outage performance of fso links. in addition, the outage performance improvement is noticed especially in the high snr region for dual hop fso and hybrid sysems compared to single hop fso and hybrid systems, respectively.

in summary, seven major technical takeaways or find

ings in this article are summarized as follows.

1) the optimum switching threshold snr to switch from fso to rf link increases with the availability of better quality rf link.

2) significant improvement in the performance and diersity gains have been obtained by deploying haps between gs and satellite for the uplink scenario. 3) no sep performance improvement is obtained due to haps for the downlink scenario.

4) hybrid fso/rf system performs better in terms of average sep and outage than the fso system under both single hop and dual hop scenarios.

5) the backup rf link in hybrid fso/rf satcom system provides better performance gain under the conditions with high pointing errors, high zenith angle, and high wind velocity. 6) full diversity gain in case of the hybrid fso/rf system is obtained only for the case when the average snr of both fso and rf links tend to infinity assuming γ f . however, diversity gain of the t hybrid fso/rf system will be equal to diversity gain of fso system under the condition when the average snr of rf link is constant. = γ opt t

7) performance of dual hop hybrid fso/rf and fso systems under the foggy condition deteriorates comared to the clear air condition.

in this article, we proposed two system models for the uplink satcom scenario namely sagin based hybrid fso/rf communication using haps (i.e., dual hop sceario) and single hop hybrid fso/rf satcom to counterct fso channel distortions and improve link reliability of fso based satcom architecture. the unified expressions for average sep and outage probability were derived in a closed form assuming gamma gamma fading turbulence with pointing errors for fso links and shadowed rician fading for the rf link. in addition, closed form asymptotic expressions with less computational complexity were also derived and the diversity gains were obtained. the derived expressions were validated using monte carlo simulations. from the performance plots, it was observed that the hybrid fso/rf systems perform better than the fso systems due to the backup rf link. in addition, the utilization of haps as a relay station also improved the reliability of uplink satcom. moreover, when zenith angle, severity of pointng errors, and wind velocity increase, it was observed that the performance gain obtained due to the rf link increases. finally, a numerical optimization was performed to obtain the optimal threshold value of the proposed system.

appendix a meijer g function

the primary definition for meijer g function is given

the following are some important equations related to meijer g function, which are used in our derivation. the relation between meijer g function and erfc(·) is given by

the relation between meijer g function and modified bessel function of second kind kv (·) is given by (cid:12) (cid:11)

(48) the uplink turbulence parameter αsr is given by (49), which is shown on the top of next page, and βsr for gs toaps link is given by

in (49) and (50), rytov variance, which is denoted by (σsr)2, for the slant optical path from the gs to haps link is given by

using the hufnagel valley boundary model, the refractive index structure parameter c2

n (0) = 1.7 × 10−14m−2/3. denotes the beam size at the transmitter and w sr denotes the beam size at the receiver, which is given by w sr = w sr sr. note that (cid:16)sr and (cid:17)sr are the beam parameters at the transmitter, which are given by (cid:17)sr = 2lp )2 and (cid:16)sr = 1 − lp/f0, respectively. fur1(w sr thermore, f0 is the phase front radius of curvature of the beam at the transmitter and lp denotes the transmission distance between haps and gs, which can be written as lp = hp/cos(θh ). in addition, rsr indicates the fried parameter, which is given by

moreover, (cid:15)sr in (49) denotes the beam wandere induced pointing errors. the beam wander induced pointng errors variance (σ sr pe )2 is given by (cid:11) where cr is a scaling constant, which is assumed as 2π.

the uplink turbulence parameter αrd is modeled simlar to (49) by replacing (hp − h0)2, θh , w sr , rsr, , rrd, (cid:15)rd (cid:15)sr pe , and σrd. here, the beam size at the receiver is given by w rd = w rd )2 , (cid:16)rd = 1 − ls/f0, and ls denotes the transmission distance beween satellite and haps, which is given by ls = (hs − hp)/cos(θs ). another parameter βrd for haps to satellite link is modeled similar to the gs to haps link by replacing (σsr)2 with (σrd)2, which denotes the rytov variance from the haps to satellite link and is given by 0

the fried parameter rrd is given by $

the beam wander induced pointing errors can be written as (cid:15)rd pe ing error variance (σ rd (hp − h0)2, θh , w sr rrd, respectively. = σ rd pe ls

. furthermore, the beam wander induced pointe )2 is given by (54) by replacing , rsr with (hs − hp)2, θs, w rd , and

for the uplink scenario during single hop transmission, the turbulence parameter αsd is obtained by replacing coresponding terms in (49) with source to destination link (cid:4) terms, where w sd = w sd (cid:16)2 )2 , (cid:16)sd = 1 − l/f0, and l denotes the transmission distance between satellite and gs, which is given by l = (hs − h0)/cos(θs ). another parameter βsd is given by (50) by replacing (σsr)2 with (σsd)2, which denotes the rytov variance from gs to satellite. the rytov variance can be written similar to (51) by replacing hp and θh with hs and θp. similarly, the fried parameter rsd and the beamander induced pointing error variance (σ sd pe )2 parameter during single hop transmission are modeled by changing appropriate parameters. sd, (cid:17)sd = 2 l k1(w sd 0 0

appendix c average and asymptotic sep derivations

here, we derive the closed form expressions for i1 and i2(γ f t ) in (29). after substituting (17) and (25) in i1 and simplifying the resultant expression using [34, eq. (07.34.21.0013.01)], the final expression in a closed form

natural disasters 2019: now is the time to not give up

centre res. epidemiology disasters, brussels, belgium, 2020. [online]. available: https://www.emdat.be/publications

satellite communications systems engineering: atmospheric effects, satellite link design and system performance, 2nd ed. hoboken, nj, usa: wiley, 2017.

space air ground integrated network: a survey ieee commun. surveys tuts., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2714 2741, oct. dec. 2018. optical communication in space: challenges and mitigation techniques ieee commun. surveys tuts., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 57 96, jan. mar. 2017.

m. a. khalighi and m. uysal

survey on free space optical communication: a communication theory perspective ieee commun. surveys tuts., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2231 2258, jun. 2014.

frequency noise measurement of diode pumped nd:yag ring lasers ieee photon. technol. lett., vol. 2, no. 11, pp. 772 774, nov. 1990.

optical phase locked loop (opll) for an amplitude modulated communications link using solid state lasers ieee j. sel. areas commun., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 569 576, apr. 1995.

h. kaushal, v. k. jain, and s. kar

free space optical communication. new delhi, springer, 2017.

performance analysis of satellite to ground downlink coherent optical communications with spatial diversity over gammaamma atmospheric turbulence appl. opt., vol. 54, no. 25, pp. 7575 7585, sep. 2015.

m. usman, h. c. yang, and m. s. alouini

practical switching based hybrid fso/rf transmission and its performance analysis ieee photon. j., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1 14, oct. 2014.

e. zedini, h. soury, and m. alouini

dual hop fso transmission systems over gamma gamma turulence with pointing errors ieee trans. wireless commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 784 796, feb. 2017. j libich et al.

experimental verification of an all optical dual hop 10 gbit/s free space optics link under turbulence regimes opt. lett., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 391 394, feb. 2015. s. sharma, a. s. madhukumar, and r. swaminathan

switching based cooperative decode and forward relaying for hybrid fso/rf networks ieee/osa j. opt. commun. netw., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 267 281, jun. 2019.

s. sharma, a. s. madhukumar, and r. swaminathan

performance of dual hop hybrid fso/rf system with pointing errors optimization in proc. ieee vtc spring, 2020, pp. 1 5. f. fidler, m. knapek, j. horwath, and w. r. leeb

optical communications for high altitude platforms ieee j. sel. topics quantum electron., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1058 1070, sep./oct. 2010.

s. karapantazis and f. pavlidou

broadband communications via high altitude platforms: a surey ieee commun. surveys tuts., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 2 31, jan. mar. 2005.

t. rakia, h. c. yang, m. s. alouini, and f. gebali

outage analysis of practical fso/rf hybrid system with adapive combining ieee commun. lett., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1366 1369, aug. 2015.

m. r. bhatnagar and m. k. arti

performance analysis of hybrid satellite terrestrial fso cooprative system ieee photon. technol. lett., vol. 25, no. 22, pp. 2197 2200, nov. 2013 india: performance analysis of integrated satellite terrestrial multintenna relay networks with multiuser scheduling ieee trans. aerosp. electron. syst., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 2718 2731, aug. 2020.

analysis of earth to satellite free space optical link perforance in the presence of turbulence, beam wander induced pointing error and weather conditions for different intensity modulation schemes iet commun., vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 2253 2258, dec. 2015.

performance enhancement by aperture averaging in terrestrial and satellite free space optical links iet optoelectron., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 111 117, may 2016.

double differential modulation for leo based land mobile satellite communication ieee trans. aerosp. electron. syst., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 3339 3346, aug. 2020.

joint relay and antenna selection in multi antenna relay netorks ieee trans. commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3417 3422, dec. 2010.

outage capacity optimization for free space optical links with pointing errors j. lightw. technol., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1702 1710, jul. 2007

on the performance of lap based multiple hop rf/fso sysems ieee trans. aerosp. electron. syst., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 499 505, feb. 2019.

performance of multibeam very high throughput satellite sysems based on fso feeder links with hpa nonlinearity ieee trans. wireless commun., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 5908 5923, sep. 2020.

analytical channel model and link design optimization for ground to hap free space optical communications j. lightw. technol., vol. 38, no. 18, pp. 5036 5047, sep. 2020.

investigation on the uav to satellite optical communication systems ieee j. sel. areas commun., vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 2128 2138, sep. 2018.

performance analysis of haps based relaying for hybrid fso/rf downlink satellite communication in proc. ieee vtc spring, 2020, pp. 1 5. a comprehensive survey on uav communication channel modeling ieee access, vol. 7, pp. 107769 107792, 2019.

satellite communications.3rd ed.hoboken, nj, usa: wiley, 2020.

i. s. ansari, f. yilmaz, and m. alouini

performance analysis of fso links over unified gamma gamma turbulence channels in proc. ieee vtc spring, 2015, pp. 1 5.

the wolfram research meijer g function document. acessed. jan. 21, 2021. [online]. available: https://functions.wolfram. com/pdf/meijerg.pdf

m. k. simon and m. s. alouini

digital communications over fading channels: a unified approach to performance analysis, 2nd ed. new york, ny, usa: wiley, 2005.

a new simple model for land mobile satellite channels: firstnd second order statistics ieee trans. wireless commun., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 519 528, may. 2003.

on the closed form performance analysis of maximal ratio combining in shadowed rician fading lms channels ieee commun. lett., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 54 57, jan. 2014.

product of squared sr random variables: application to satelite communication ieee trans. aerosp. electron. syst., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 486 496, feb. 2020.

i. s. gradshteyn and i. m. ryzhik

table of integrals, series, and products, 7th ed.new york, ny, usa: academic, 2007.

ed., near earth laser communications. boca raton, fl, usa: crc press, 2009. g. alfano and a. d. maio

sum of squared shadowed rice random variables and its aplication to communication systems performance prediction ieee trans. wireless commun., vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 3540 3545, oct. 2007.

r. swaminathan, g. k. karagiannidis, and r. roy

joint antenna and relay selection strategies for decode andorward relay networks ieee trans. veh. technol., vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 1 20, nov. 2016.

e. w. ng and m. geller

j. guo, p. walk and h. jafarkhani

optimal deployments of uavs with directional antennas for a power efficient coverage ieee trans. commun., vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 5159 5174, aug. 2020.

examples of technical characteristics for unmanned aircraft con

trol and non payload communications links itu r, geneva, switzerland, tech. rep. m.2233, 2012.