identification and mapping of submerged plants in a shallow lake using quickbird satellite data

turkey is a country rich in lakes and wetlands e monitoring of all these will require advances in technology such as remote sensing. in this study, the aquatic plants of the large and shallow lake mogan, located in central anatolia were identified and mapped using high spatial resolution quickbird imagery. as lake mogan is an important bird area the assessment of submerged plant species is of great value for ecosystem conservation and management. quickbird multispectral image acquired on august 6, 2005 was geometrically corrected and a water mask was used based on strong absorption of near infrared (nir) wavelengths by calm, clear and deep water. the water mask was applied using band reflectance values for a specific pixel satisfying the conditions of band decreasing property (green > red > nir) and nir < nirthreshold. unsupervised classification was applied to the wetland only image to identify submerged plant vegetation classes. spectral similarity among the isodata classes was used to decrease the number of the classes to the available species in the lake. classification of quickbird satellite data with an unsupervised classification technique provided high accuracy for identification and mapping of submerged plant coverage and of different submerged plant species and water classes (83.02% and 71.69%). quickbird sensor data were found to be very useful for classifying submerged plants in a large and shallow lake. however, the closeness of the dates of field data collection to that of the sensor overpass and mixed pixel problem are the main limitations in the near ideal conditions for submerged vegetation classification with satellite data having high spatial resolution. (cid:2) 2008 elsevier ltd. all rights reserved. journal of environmental management 90 (2009) 2138e2143

lakes and wetlands are both ecologically and economically important ecosystems. the economic value of the ecosystem services provided by lakes and wetlands on a world scale is immense, as shown by costanza et al. (1997); the total value of the world's natural systems amounted to over 30 trillion us dollars per year with wetlands (as defined by costanza et al., 1997) contributing more than 10% and wetlands together with lakes and rivers more than 25%. shallow lake wetlands are known to switch between two alternative stable

edu.tr (z. akyurek), meryem@metu.edu.tr (m. beklioglu). www.elsevier.com/locate/jenvman

states: a macrophyte (aquatic plant) dominated clear water state or a phytoplankton dominated turbid water state (jeppesen, 1998; scheffer, 1998; scheffer et al., 1993). the macrophyte dominated clear water state tends to support high biodiversity and in turn high ecological and conservation values. in shallow lake wetlands, submerged and emergent aquatic plants have many important functions including suppression of phytoplankton, provision of habitat for inverterates, fish and waterfowl, refuges for zooplankton and stabiization of sediment by their roots (gulati and van donk, 2002; jeppesen et al., 1997; meerhoff et al., 2003; moss et al., 1996; william et al., 2004). the loss of aquatic plants can coincide with the loss of water clarity (william et al., 2004) and ecological and conservation values (moss, 1998). given their identification and ecological and economic value the monitoring of aquatic plants in shallow lake wetlands can be very useful for conservation planning and management.

most lakes are shallow with a predominating littoral zone where aquatic plants grow (moss, 1998). turkey has over 200 natural lakes, 75 dams, and 700 lagoons; most of these are shallow with very large surface areas, yielding a total surface area of 10 000 km2. for instance, lake beysehir and lake egirdir have surface areas of 730 km2 and 480 km2, respectively. due to the high number and large sizes of lakes, it is very hard to monitor all of them using field studies based on transect sampling methods as it is time consuming, labour intensive, and expensive, especially with increasing surface area. therefore, the successful application of new, fast, and dependable technologies to lake monitoring studies could be invaluable (coops et al., 1999; sawaya et al., 2003; vis et al., 2003). as submerged vegetation absorbs visible red electromagnetic radiation during the growing season it can be detected by remote sensors (kirkman, 1996). satellite remote sensing could therefore contribute to the study and monitoring of aquatic plants in lakes due to good spatial and temporal coverages, and multispectral measurements.

mapping submerged plants over large areas has been performed using either aerial photography (kirkman, 1996), medium resolution satellite data (dekker et al., 2005; schweizer et al., 2005), or close range remote sensing (sprenkle et al., 2004). although medium spatial resolution sensors such as landsat and spot were used to detect suberged vegetation in relatively shallow waters, the diversity and heterogeneity of bottom reflective targets often lead to mixed pixel problems (wolter et al., 2005). seagrasses have been classified successfully by many researchers (dekker et al., 2005; schweizer et al., 2005); however, water clarity is higher in marine and tidal ecosystems, compared to many lake ecosystems. turbidity is one of the main factors decreasng the accuracy of classification of submerged plants (wolter et al., 2005). today's sensors such as ikonos and quickbird provide high spatial resolution images that are as good as airborne photographic products. there have been several studies using high spatial resolution images, such as ikonos and quickbird images, for mapping sub surface features, yet mapping submerged plants in lakes with high spatial resoluion satellite data is a new approach. for instance, sawaya et al. (2003) used ikonos data to map emergent and submerged plants. however, all density classes for submerged vegetation were merged into one class for accuracy assessent, which yielded to user's and producer's accuracies of 54.2% and 92.9%, respectively (sawaya et al., 2003). furtherore, wolter et al. (2005) used quickbird sensor data for mapping submerged plant distribution with a multi temporal classification and obtained overall accuracies between 71% and 93% at three sites across the great lakes (wolter et al., 2005).

the contribution of high spatial resolution satellite data to submerged vegetation classification studies is promising (sawaya et al., 2003); however, mapping submerged vegetaion with high spatial resolution data needs further improveent (wolter et al., 2005). since the diversity of submerged plants in a lake ecosystem directly reflects the overall diversity of the ecosystem (moss, 1998), the identification and mapping of submerged plant species could be very useful in regions rich in lakes, such as turkey. thus, in this study, we aimed to identify and map the distribution and coverage of submerged plant species in lake mogan, turkey, using high spatial resolution quickbird satellite data.

2. materials and methods

in lake mogan (39(cid:2)460n, 32(cid:2)460e) (fig. 1). it is a large and shallow freshwater lake located in central anatolia, 20 km south of the capital city ankara, turkey. the lake is surrounded by a large emergent plant wetland, which is a nesting, breeding and migratory site for waterfowl species having the status of a specially protected area (spa), as assigned by the ministry of environent (sandsten et al., 2005). selected geographical and physical features of lake mogan are summarized in table 1. the study was carried out

2.2. field data collection

as aquatic plants in lake mogan are fully grown by august, the field surveys were conducted between august 23 and august 26 and on september 1, 2005. a transectased sampling method was used (see eurolimpacs' webpage, url 1). in this method, the lake surface was divided by 15 transects at 250 m intervals and plant percentage cover sampled in 66 1 m (cid:3) 1 m quadrats evenly located along the transects. in order to sample submerged plant species below the surface, a rake was used to collect plant material from within the quadrats. the coordinates for each sampling locaion were recorded using a gps with (cid:4)2 m accuracy. the sampling locations are shown in fig. 1. submerged plant species collected from each sampling location were identified using identification keys for water plants (altinayar, 1988; haslam et al., 1986). the submerged plant species potamogeon pectinatus, najas sp. (najas minor and najas marina), and myriophyllum spicatum were recorded with percentage covers of 5e15%, 10e21% and <1e3%, respectively. m. spicatum was recorded at only one location; it was regarded as a very rare species and not included in the further classification steps. therefore,

secchi disc depth (sdd), which is a good indicator of the water clarity and density of the submerged plants in lakes (coops et al., 1999) was also measured. the relationship between sdd and water depth (wd) was used to define seprate water classes in the classification. when the wd was less than double the sdd, it was assumed that the diversity and heterogeneity of bottom reflective targets led to problems with a mixed pixel (kloiber et al., 2002). arcgis 9.1 was used to transfer the field data into geographical information systems (gis) environment. fig. 1. quickbird satellite image of lake mogan acquired on august 6, 2005.

image (acquired on august 6, 2005) with a spatial resolution of 2.41 m (cid:3) 2.41 m was used in this study. the image was cloud free and geometrically corrected based on 13 ground control points (gcps) collected in the field, with the same gps device used in the field survey. the gps accuracy was (cid:4)2 m and the resulting root mean square errors from the geometric correction of the image were 0.31 pixels for x and 0.46 pixels for y. the methodology for the satellite data analyses is presented in fig. 2. terrestrialeaquatic and reed bed boundaries were digitized by visual interpretation. the constructed vector data for the terrestrialeaquatic boundary was used to create a bitmap, which was used for masking the terrestrial area to produce a wetland only image. afterwards, k means unsupervised classification was applied to the produced wetland only image to identify emergent vegetation coverage dominated by reed (phragmites australis). k means unsupervised classifier identifies the distinct spectral classes present in the image data. among the numerous clustering algorithms to determine the natural spectral grouping present in a data set the k means table 1 geographical, hydrological and physical features of lake mogan

approach accepts from the analyst the number of clusters to be located in the data, the algorithm then arbitrarily ''seeds'' that number of cluster centers in the multidimensional measureent space. each pixel in the image is then assigned to the cluster whose arbitrary means vector is closest. after all pixels have been classified in this manner, revised mean vectors for each of the clusters are computed. the revised means are then used as the basis to reclassify the image data. the procedure continues until there is no significant change in the location of class mean vectors between successive iteraions of the algorithm. the wetland only image was classified into 20 classes and consequently aggregated into two final classes, as 'reed' and 'no reed', using the spectral similarity between the classes. accuracy assessment for the classificaion was done at 512 random points against the digitized vector data for the reed bed boundary with a result of 94.69%. then, the same vector data were converted into a bitmap in order to mask the reed bed area. in addition to the masks for terrestrial and reed bed area a water mask was established. near infrared (nir) absorption of calm, clear, and deep water is so strong that nir reflectance over such water becomes nearly zero (wolter et al., 2005). therefore, the water mask was established using band reflectance values for a specific pixel satisfying the conditions green > red > nir and nir < nirthreshold ¼ 80. the nir band reflectance threshold value of 80 was specific to the date of image acquiition rather than a generic value. afterwards, unsupervised classification of the image to 50 isodata classes was performed and the class aggregation was done using the spectral similarty among classes. firstly, the isodata classes were aggregated into two classes as water and submerged vegetation in order to discriminate submerged vegetation from water. then, isodata classes were aggregated in a more detailed manner in order to identify and distinguish the submerged plant species and water classes. for that purpose, isodata classes were aggreated into five final classes, 'water a (2(cid:3)sdd > wd)', 'water b (2(cid:3)sdd < wd)', 'p. pectinatus', 'najas spp. at the surface', and 'najas spp. below the surface'. m. spicatum, the other recorded species, was not used in classification, since this species was observed at only one location with a minor contribution during the field surveys.

the overall accuracy for the aggregated five classes was tested against the field data. thirteen out of these 66 sampling locations fell into the water mask and therefore data from 53 sampling locations were used in the accuracy test. the accuracy test was done using a 9 pixel kernel around a specific sampling location in order to eliminate the distortions that might have resulted due to the rough and windy field conditions. it was observed that whenever the submerged plant percent coverage at the surface was less than 30% (regarded as low vegetation), these pixels were mistaken as water pixels and were accepted as water pixels in the accuracy test. the geometric correction, image classification, aggregation and acuracy assessment steps were done using pci geomatica 9.1.

the submerged vegetation coverage was classified with 83.02% (khat ¼ 65.95%) overall accuracy, while different submerged plant species and water classes were classified with 71.69% (khat ¼ 86.5%) overall accuracy.

the error matrix for submerged vegetation coverage and water, together with the producer's and user's accuracies, is presented. in table 2,

in table 3, the error matrix for submerged plant species and water classes, together with the producer's and user's accuraies, is presented.

table 2 error matrix, user's and producer's accuracies of the classification into two classes: water and submerged vegetation coverage

vegetation water total

80.00 table 3 the classification of error matrix, user's and producer's accuracies of submerged plant species and water classes (a: water (2(cid:3)secchi disc depth > water depth), b: water (2(cid:3)secchi disc depth < water depth), c: p. pectinatus, d: najas spp. at the surface, e: najas spp. below the surface)

the thematic map from the detailed classification of the submerged plant species and water classes for lake mogan is presented in fig. 3.

in this study, we aimed to identify and map the distribution and coverage of submerged plant species in lake mogan; this was achieved with 83.02% accuracy for submerged plant coverage classification and 71.69% accuracy for classification of three structurally similar submerged plant species and two separate water classes. for the classification of the coverage of submerged plants we successfully achieved higher accuracy

than sawaya et al. (2003), and also managed to achieve the 85% accuracy target recommended for land use and land cover classifications (anderson et al., 1976). as there is no universal standard target accuracy for submerged plant classification the less detailed land use/cover classification scheme of anderson et al. (1976), which is well known in remote sensing applicaions, was taken as a target. submerged plant coverage classification is harder than that for emergent plants because the reflectance properties of emergent plants resembles that of terrestrial vegetation and is spectrally easier to distinguish from water due to the high contrast (williams et al., 2003). on the other hand, the nature of being submerged in the water brings about the problems of mixed pixels to submerged plant classification. wolter et al. (2005) suggested that the near ideal conditions for submerged plant classification included good quality images, low relative humidity, good water clarity, calm water surface, and matching of the field data collection to the sensor overpass. on the basis of these conditions there were several limitations to the classification of submerged plant species in lake mogan. first of all, water clarity is low in lake ecosystems compared to marine ecosystems and turbidity decreases the accuracies of submerged plant species identification. moreover, field conditions also set some limitaions; for instance, windy days may cause shifts and rough surface areas. the number and spatial distribution of the field data have great importance too. furthermore, sampling submerged plant percent coverage within a quadrate of size 1 m (cid:3) 1 m, and then assigning this percent coverage value to represent a pixel of size 2.41 m (cid:3) 2.41 m might lead to mixed pixel problems. if the submerged plant percent coverage was low or the submerged plant species had sparse growth, the representative property of the field measurements decreased for the corresponding pixel. to overcome this problem a larger quadrat the size of the quadrat was restricted to the size of the boat used in the field surveys. physcal limitations on sampling such as this should be addressed in further investigations and steps should be taken to overcome them as failure to do so may limit the usefulness of remote the sensing based monitoring exercises; ensuring that ground/water data correspond with the image interpretation is an essential component of a monitoring such as this. is needed; however,

the morphological features of the submerged plant species in lake mogan closely resembled each other leaf structure and growth stature) and thus they were not easy to separate. moreover, both p. pectinatus and najas spp. (n. maina and n. minor) had sparse growth which made it difficult to classify them compared to more densely growing plants (sawaya et al., 2003). in the error matrix (table 3) of the classification of submerged vegetation percent cover, there was no significant confusion between the submerged plant coverage and water clases. however, in the classification of submerged plant species and water classes (table 3) the confusion increased. there was no significant confusion between the water classes and the two submerged plant species' classes: najas spp. at the surface and p. pectinatus. the submerged plant species class that had the highest errors was najas spp. below the surface as it had characteristics of the water and vegetation together. the (e.g.