improving spectrum management for satellite communication systems with hunger marketing

feng li, member, ieee, kwok yan lam, senior member, ieee, jingyu hua, member, ieee, kanglian zhao, member, ieee, nan zhao, senior member, ieee, and li wang

abstract—efficient spectrum management is an important issue in satellite communications due to the pervasive growth in wireless communications and the ever increasing demand by bandwidth hungry mobile applications. while various kinds of static and dynamic spectrum allocation schemes have been studied by satellite researchers, the issue of unpredictable user behavior, hence demand for bandwidth, remains one of the key challenges faced by the research community. in this article, we introduce the hunger marketing strategy in satellite spectrum management in order to address the unpredictable user demands. when adopting hunger marketing, the system always maintain a certain level of spectrum supply shortage, thus stimulating the desire of users to plan and commit their bandwidth requirements in advance, hence making their behavior more predictable and benefiting satellite systems. besides, in circumstances of multieam satellite systems, when allocating bands to new satellite users, the issue of increase in inter cell interference is also considered in this article. thus a two stage dynamic game model based on hunger marketing is proposed which aims to achieve an optimal balance between spectrum utilization and interell interference. numerical results are presented to show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

index terms—satellite communications, multibeam satellite

systems, spectrum optimization, hunger marketing

s atellite communication networks have successfully

served the traditional needs of the telecommunication market, i.e. telephony and broadcasting, especially in georaphic areas where terrestrial links are impractical to deploy . in recent years, owing to the rapid development of data consuming mobile services, there has been a phenomenal growth in demand for broadband satellite access.

many techniques including multiple spot beams, multirotocol label switching, stochastic networks and dynamic

this work was partly supported by scripts centre. also, this work was supported by the national natural science foundation of china under grant 61401194. (corresponding author: li wang.)

f. li and l. wang are with college of information engineering, zheiang university of technology, hangzhou, 310023, china. f. li and l. wang are also with school of computer science and engineering, nanyang technological university, 639798, singapore. liang2002@zjut.edu.cn)

k.y. lam is with school of computer science and engineering, nanyang

technological university, 639798, singapore. (kwokyan.lam@ntu.edu.sg)

j. hua is with school of information and electronic engineering, zhejiang

gongshang university, hangzhou, 310018, china. (eehjy@zjut.edu.cn)

k. zhao is with school of electronic science and engineering, nanjing

university, nanjing, 210093, china.(zhaokanglian@nju.edu.cn)

information and communication engieering, dalian university of technology, dalian 116024, china. (zhaoan@dlut.edu.cn) spectrum access have been developed to exploit satellite sysems to support broadband applications by achieving higher spectrum efficiency . in , a non orthogonal multiple access method was proposed. in , a cooperative transmision strategy between satellite systems and terrestrial networks was designed to guarantee lower performance degradation for both systems during sharing spectrum. in addition, dynamic allocation schemes were proposed to cater for various critical factors including hot zones, user priority, signal diversity, service types and even unstable weather. more system reources are often allocated to hot beams in order to meet user demands or to address adverse channels . in recent years, dynamic spectrum sharing and market based techniques have been introduced to enhance energy efficiency in satellite systems .

spectrum management for broadband satellite systems, unike their terrestrial counterparts, is an emerging area that attracts substantial on going research. in general, satellite users adopt a subscription model by committing a fixed bandwidth for meeting their anticipated communication needs. wholeales subscribers typically commit bulk purchase of spectrum resources and then resell the spectrum to retail subscribers. recently, spectrum management schemes have been designed to utilize the idle bandwidth of wholesale subscriber users by allowing dynamic spectrum allocation to other users on an ad hoc basis . however, due to the unpredictable behavior of retail subscriber users, it remains a challenge to design efficient spectrum management scheme that can achieve an optimal balance between spectrum utilization and increase in inter cell interference.

in this article, we propose an efficient spectrum pricing framework to address the issue of unpredictable demands of common satellite users on satellite spectrum. our design is based on the assumption that when there is ample supply of satellite bandwidth, retail subscriber users tend to be less motivated to plan and commit their bandwidth requirements early, hence resulting in highly unpredictable user demands on the satellite system. in this regard, we introduce the hunger marketing strategy to spectrum management so as to influence users' behavior in bandwidth planning and benefit satellite system meanwhile, thus allowing a more efficient dynamic spectrum management. a two stage game model is adopted to formulate the optimization problem. the rest of this paper is organized as follows. in section ii, a system model with regard to multibeam satellite systems is given. then, a spectrum optimization scheme based on hunger marketing is developed in section iii. numerical results are presented in section iv 1

to justify the performance of the proposed scheme. this letter is concluded in section v.

in this paper, we consider multibeam satellite systems which stay in geostationary tracks and adopt spectrum reuse techniques to enhance spectrum efficiency. to be specific, a practical four color spectrum reuse pattern is applied in this scenario as shown in fig. 1. the satellite systems are supposed to utilize flexible resource optimization methods. obliquerojection based multibeam system is taken into account to make the system model approaching to actual applications. as shown in fig. 1, the cells with same color shares the same band wherein inter cell interference interference unavoidably occurs.

in multibeam satellite systems, the inter beam interference takes effect on system performance. in the coverage area of multibeam satellite, oblique projection is mixed with ellipse projection which leads to the difference between multibeam satellite systems and traditional cellular distribution. in this paper, the mixed projection is as shown in fig. 1. wherein, θ denotes the deviation angle between satellite terminal (β, 2) and the cell center. we have ( f(ds o)2 + (ds ) β2)−1

where ds o is the distance between spatial satellite and the cell center. ds β2 and do β2 are the distances from terrestrial user (β, 2) to satellite and subastral point, respectively. r denotes earth radius.

in this paper, we consider a point to multipoint scenario and focus on the uplink resource management in satellite systems. in uplink satellite transmission, the carrier power can be given as

where pα1 is the transmit power of satellite user (α, 1), εα1 is the elevation angle from (α, 1) to satellite, θα α1 denotes the derivation angle between terminal (α, 1) and the central line of cell α. gα1(εα1) and gα(θα α1) denote the antenna gain of (α, 1) and α, respectively. besides, dα1 denotes the straightine distance between satellite and terrestrial user (α, 1). λ 2

is wavelength, while fα1(εα1) is satellite channel fading for (α, 1) at direction εα1.

then, for satellite user (α, 1) shown in fig. 1, the transmis

sion capacity with unit bandwidth can be expressed as

iii. satellite spectrum management with hunger marketing

the proposed satellite spectrum scheme is expected to be deployed in a traditional scenario where satellite users need to purchase bands from satellite systems, and the satellite band resource is assumed to be relatively sufficient. it can be envisioned, if satellite systems release all available spectrum to market, an ideal price or profit would hardly be attained. besides, to respond to unpredictable demands of satellite users, hunger marketing means that the number of available spectrum resource will remain limited and certain degree of shortage or spectrum scarcity is allowed. only when the spectrum shortage attains a maximal threshold, more satellite spectrum can be further released to market.

the proposed hunger marketing scheme requires that several important factors to be taken into account: i) the spectrum demand of satellite user is continuous and stochastic; ii) the number of available satellite bands is relatively sufficient; iii) spectrum shortage is allowed until settled maximal threshold is reached; iv) periodic checking on spectrum dealing will be performed by satellite systems.

in this scenario, the spectrum demand variable x is stochasic which likely leads to the randomness of satellite spectrum's supplement. besides, spectrum bandwidth will be checked by satellite systems in period of t . when available spectrum drops to the given level of r or below, supplying behavior initiates. in hunger marketing, r can be negative. in formulaion of this satellite spectrum management, we aim to analyze every cost of satellite systems and achieve an optimal spectrum level in spectrum pool on the basis of satellite user's stochastic demand. in every detecting period t , spectrum supplement will be proceeded from clock t = 0, t 2 [0, t ] before the number of available spectrum ix (t) < 0 in spectrum pool. it means the spectrum supplement triggers only when the market drops into hungry condition. with the increase of trading time, we have

where q denotes the spectrum increment for every round, b denotes the maximal shortage threshold. the expectation of spectrum demand in every period is ∫

the spectrum shortage does not occur when available specrum in market is non negative, i. e., ix (t ) > 0. bringing t = t into formula ix (t), we have x < q−b t . that means, in condition of 0 < x < q−b t , supplement shortage of satellite spectrum will not happen. then, the overall expected holding cost can be expressed as ∫

where h denotes the index of spectrum holding cost. the overall expected cost of spectrum shortage is

where p denotes the cost index of spectrum shortage.

then, the satellite system's overall cost per unit time is

our target is to find optimal q and b, making the overall expected cost t c(b, q) minimal, i. e., the optimization ob c(b, q). taking derivative jective can be depicted as min

k can make g(q, b) = kh(q, b) for 8(q, b). hence, the solution (q∗, b∗) exists to make h(q, b) = 0, g(q, b) = 0 tenable in same time. according to the extreme value theorem of multivariate function, (q∗, b∗) is the optimal point we are searching.

iv. satellite spectrum pricing

after analyzing satellite system's costs during the hunger marketing, we head to achieve the optimal spectrum pricing scheme subsequently. in this case, we introduce a two stage pricing model — stackelberg game model to formulate this problem. furthermore, the effects of inter cell interference when new satellite users purchase the band and join in the networks, are taken into account. amidst applying stackelberg model, in stage i, the leader (satellite system) moves first to offer the spectrum and interference pricing. then, the satellite user (as the follower) choose a strategy to maximize its benefit in respond to the satellite system's action. in another hand, the satellite system needs to predict the response of the follower and proposes an reasonable price.

stage i: the satellite system's utility function can be

where πpnfns denotes the interference cost charged by the satellite system. π is interference pricing, pn is the transmit power of the new satellite user, and fns is the corresponding path loss to the satellite system. hcn and scn denote the holding cost and shortage cost described above. bn denotes the bandwidth purchased and χ denotes the spectrum pricing coefficient transferring bandwidth to uniform benefit. besides, xloss = po (cid:0) p′ o denotes the power required by the original satellite user sharing the same band with satellite user n in previous condition without such co channel interference. stage ii: the satellite user's utility function can be ex o, where p′

where log2(1 + ) denotes the transmission capacity received by the new satellite user as its benefit. ω denotes the monetary coefficient.

in the execution phase, having observed the spectrum and interference pricing of the satellite system, the satellite user's nash equilibrium can be derived firstly. then, combining n and given sinr requirement optimal pnfns = γtar, we obtain po(π). substituting pn and pofos+n0(αn)bn po, we can identify the equations to solve the optimal pricing of π and χ. transmit power p∗