barry evans, university of surrey; markus werner and erich lutz, dlr michel bousquet, supaero; giovanni e. corazza, university of bologna gerard maral, ecole nationale supérieure des télécommunications robert rumeau, cnes; erina ferro, isti

and cost effective environment. the premise is that this can only be accomplished by integration of networks, specifically integration of terrestrial and satellite networks

satellite broadcasting and mobile satellite sysems to cover air and sea are established marets, but elsewhere satellites have not been shown to compete well with terrestrial service provision. however, we should recall the unique features of satellites: wide area coverage and speed to deliver new services to the market. these will be key to the delivery of affordable future services and the choice of satellite as the preferred delivery mechanism.

due to the dominance of internet based mulimedia applications and changing customer trends, and hence changing market and business models , satellites cannot afford to focus on a specific type of service as in the past. from a technical point of view, delivery can be split into two service types: fixed and mobile. the two types of delivery mechanism, unicast and broadast/multicast, are applicable to both service catgories depending on the number of pieces of user equipment receiving the same multimedia content from the same source at the same time.

from the wide area perspective, the satellite can still maintain exclusive status in the tradiional maritime and aeronautical markets due to its unique coverage feature. wide area coverage has in the past meant lower powers and hence poor efficiency. as the demand grows from pasenger vehicles for broader band multimedia serices, satellites need to become more efficient in their delivery, exploiting new technologies such as multibeam antennas and onboard processing.

in the coverage of land masses satellites do not have such exclusivity. both fixed and mobile advances in technology

improved/ new systems

development of new services

it is possible to deliver the multicast/broadcast by other means, such as terrestrial digital audio broadcasting and digtal video broadcasting mobile standards, but integration is still the key, and economics will dictate which system eventually wins out. emergency services aeronautical

a single bill for all services with reduced cost • reliable wireless access even in the failure of one or more networks these requirements push today's vertical netork approach with single services toward a horzontal network approach with multiservices, as shown in fig. 3.

in order to implement this horizontal approach, the telecommunication industry is searching for a generic radio access network connected to a uniied ip based core network. the difficulty is that there are already several access technologies availble, and these have been developed independenty for special purposes. therefore, interworking between different access systems is becoming a key issue for future systems.

even though the different access systems have been developed separately, they do complement each other under a layered concept, as shown in fig. 4, in terms of coverage and capacity. the broadcast layer will have the capability to cover large areas and handle full mobility; however, capacity is lower than with other layers. the technologies used in this layer can vary from dvb/dab to 3g partnership project (3gpp) umts to a system such as s dmb (satellite digial multimedia broadcasting) currently under study. the cellular layer includes 2g and 3g sysems and supports up to 2 mb/s depending on mobility conditions. this layer supports full mobility using handover techniques. the hot spot layer supports very high data rates, but mobility is restricted. personal area networks are meant for offices and homes to communicate with dif n figure 3. moving from single services to ip based multiservices. services

ip multiservices network

there needs to be efficient coverage of the hot spots as well as wider area mobility coverage provided by the satellites. in providing the focused interworking, the challenge is not to block the ultimate goal of integration. to cdma, inmarsat has continued to develp its proprietary time division multiple access (tdma) system but delivers 3g equivalent packet based services.

so the lessons learned from the mobile satel

lite experience are: • leo and highly elliptical orbit (heo) constelations have proved too expensive to compete with geos or cellular systems, so there is now a return to geos.

satellites can only economically provide niche services to areas inaccessible to cellular; hence, for mass market services there needs to be integration, not to compete but to collaboate with cellular.

select the service most appropriate to the satellite delivery mechanism.

use the wide coverage broadcast attribute of

satellites. based on the above factors, the satellite digital multimedia broadcasting (s dmb) system was proposed within european union (eu) projects satin , modis , and maestro to deliver multimedia broadcast and multicast serices (mbms) to users in terrestrial cellular covrage as well as outside. the proposed s dmb system is mainly centered around content delivery or push type services where the content is pushed toward the terminals whenever the resources are available and stored in the terminal local cache memory for later retrieval. the architecture is characterized by gap fillers or intermediate modle repeaters (imrs) located at selected 3g base stations, which broadcast the mbms signals terestrially in the adjacent mss band to allow inuilding and urban area penetration.

a similar concept has been adopted within the mbsat system now in operation in japan and korea, where the service driver is mobile television rather than video content. such systems have competition from mbms in 3g and from dvb h, but offer a real new maret opportunity for satellite and, most important, the first truly integrated system delivery.

the dab systems via satellite s dab (dars in the united states) should also be mentioned in this context as radio broadcast is a further examle of content delivery. the idea has been around since 1990 when cd radio first filed in the united states. several systems have been proposed since the s dab standards were produced with worldspace in the mid 1990s being peraps the leading contender with its satellites covring asia, the caribbean, and the americas.

the terrestrial equivalent, t dab, has not spread widely, with the limited u.k. network being perhaps the best developed. in the united states, in the early 2000s two commercial sysems became operational: xm radio using geo satellites, and sirius satellite radio using heos. both systems use terrestrial gap fillers in a similar way to that proposed by sdmb and mbsat. the use of heo satellites is interesting in that they achieve improved coverage in the urban area due to their higher elevation angles and reduce the number of gap fillers required. currently xm has around 3.5 million and sirus 1.5 million customers in the us.

when we consider mobile broadband by satelite, the major market is for passenger vehicles 3g

inmarsat —bgan • s umts • digital radio —worldspace sirius, xmradio •satellite tv mbsat •sdmb

inmarsat — maritime inmarsat — land/ sea/air •regional — omnitracs •non geo — iridium, globalstar, ico •super geo — thuraya

communications broadcast via haps

umts core network haps ground station

wide coverage larger cells and mobility manageent between the various networks. a subsidiary layer of intermediate sized cells is provided by high altitude platforms (haps) located at around 20 25 km in the stratosphere to deal more efficiently with hot spot areas and relieve the demands on terresrial infrastructure as well as collection for lowerower sensor networks and broadcasting to urban areas. all networks are vertically and horizontally connected, as indicated in fig 4, and seamless and secure handover between them is provided. this is a vision, and in the following we look at the comonents that will be needed to realize the vision.

satellite constellations and payloads in the immediate future, the choice may be between geo and heo since in urban areas the probability of direct reception from a heo satelite is higher than from geo satellites; hence, there is reduced blockage, and fewer terrestrial repeaters are required . however, leo/ meo will come onto the scene in the longer term due to availability of sophisticated small (hundreds of kilograms) satellites with cheaper prices for production and launching. clusters and swarms of such satellites, maybe with fragmented functions and connected together via an in space ad hoc network, will be possible.

haps, although not strictly satellite, can also play a role in both mobile and fixed satellite serice delivery. for the emerging sensor network/ security systems, they could be more efficient standalone than satellite for lower power termials or sensors. they could also play a role in a hybrid network of satellites and haps where there is much to be gained from use of hybrid orbits with interorbit links in terms of connectivty, coverage, and service routing.

when we consider future payloads there are two main choices, bent pipe (transparent) and regenerative payloads offer a number of benefits, such as efficient spectrum sharing, reduced delay, improved link budgets, and possible seamless integration with terrestrial networks. but so far they have not been sufficiently flexible.