5g and beyond wireless networks are expected to support extremely high data rates and radically new services and use cases, as well as extensively wide coverage. although terrestrial wireless networks have dominated mobile users from 3g to 4g, the gap between demand and supply is becoming more and more prominent. integrated terrestrial satellite networking is an ideal solution to address such a dilemma. while terestrial networks can achieve high speed data services at low cost, satellite based access is one way to complement terrestrial based networks to ensure ubiquitous, 100 percent geographic coverage. satellite communication networks are emerging in recent years, which can provide super wide coverage and high capacity. therefore, integrated terrestril satellite communication networking is a quite promising solution for future 5g and beyond networks.

to provide a variety of services and use cases with diferent qos requirements in terms of latency, reliability, throughput, and security, etc., more research activities and studies are needed to exploit the respective advantages of each segment of integrated terrestrial satellite communiation networks in terms of coverage, flexibility, reliability, availability, and security. this special issue focuses on the challenges and novel solutions for service oriented groundpace integrated networks, including communication techologies for integrated networks, services and applications for integrated networks, and security and privacy for interated networks. thanks to the guest editors, j. ren, n. zhang, y. gao, y. wang, m. ismail, and j. kimery, who did an excellent job in editing this special issue for our readers. please stay tuned for new development in the research area of service oriented space air ground integrated networks and read the editorial for more detail about the papers in this special issue.

in addition to the 10 articles in the special issue, we have

also included 11 articles accepted from the open call.

the first article, "a hierarchical soft ran slicing frameork for differentiated service provisioning" by j. li et al., proposes a hierarchical soft slicing framework to enable softare defined radio access networks supporting differentiatd services with diverse qos requirements. the proposed framework consists of network level slicing and gnodeb levl slicing. it allows the accommodation of time varying traffic loads of differentiated services over multiple gnodebs, while enabling dynamic inter gnodeb resource blocks sharing to increase the resource multiplexing gain. a case study is presented to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework, followed by a discussion of open research issues.

the second article, "high speed train communications in 5g: design elements to mitigate the impact of very high mobility" by g. noh et al., summarizes key design principles and specifications of 5g nr for better supporting the high speed train sceario. based on the high speed train scenaro description, various nr design elements to achieve very high mobility are discussed, including numerology, frame structure, refrence signals, multi antenna schemes, cell search, random access, and mobility support. discussions of the challenges and perspectives for the high speed train communications of beyond 5g are also provided.

in the third article, "automatic network slicing for iot in smart city", f. zhou et al. propose a machine learning driven automatic network slicing framework which can inteligently scale slices according to network state. the resource preservation and slicing implementation scheme is given to trade off the robustness and resource efficiency. the study provides preliminary results via simulation and experimenation to justify the effectiveness and efficiency of the proosed design.

in the fourth article, "enabling 5g on the ocean: a hybrid satellite uav terrestrial network solution", x. li et al. study the integration of unmanned aerial vehicles (uav) with existing maritime communication networks. they invesigate the potential gains of hybrid satellite uav terrestrial networks for maritime coverage. different from the terrestril scenario, vessels on the ocean keep to sea lanes and are sparsely distributed. this provides new opportunities to ease the scheduling of uavs. new challenges arise due to the more complicated maritime prorogation environment, as well as the mutual interference between uavs and existing satellites/terrestrial based stations. the authors discuss these issues and show possible solutions considering practical constraints

in the fifth article, "surveillance plane aided air ground integrated vehicular networks: architectures, applicaions, and potentials", j. sun et al. propose a framework for enhanced air ground integrated vehicular network (agvn) by introducing a surveillance plane to promote the mangement in the control plane. components such as virtual network functions and service function chaining can be beneficial to the framework. the authors also summarize research directions in designing a more flexible manageent scheme by coupling the service, surveillance, and conrol planes of the enhanced agvn.

in the sixth article, "ai enabled next generation comunication networks: intelligent agent and ai router", c. jiang et al. introduce a new intelligent agent based