thibault deleu, mathieu dervin, kenta kasai, and françois horlin

abstract—digital video broadcasting satellite second genertion (dvb s2) is the current european standard for satellite broadcast and broadband communications. it relies on high order modulations up to 32 amplitude/phase shift keying (apsk) in order to increase the system spectral efficiency. unfortunately, as the modulation order increases, the receiver becomes more sensiive to physical layer impairments and, notably, to the distortions induced by the power amplifier and the channelizing filters aboard the satellite. the predistortion of a nonlinear satellite channel has been studied for many years. however, the performance of existing predistortion algorithms generally becomes poor when high order modulations are used on a nonlinear channel with long memory. in this paper, we investigate a new iterative method that predisorts the blocks of transmitted symbols to minimize the euclidian distance between the transmitted and received symbols. we also propose approximations to relax the predistorter complexity while keeping its performance acceptable.

index terms—pre distortion, non linear satellite channel, high

i n broadcast or broadband satellite communication, informa

tion is most often exchanged between one hub and many user terminals in a so called star topology. in this work, the focus is on the forward link, defined as the link from the hub towards the user terminals, while the return link (when it exists) refers to the link from a user terminal towards the hub. in such context, the available radio spectrum is generally divided into sub bands, also referred to as channels, which are separately amplified by different power amplifiers aboard the satellite. in a single carrier per channel scenario, each carrier transmitted on the forward link is separately amplified by a different power amplifier. as a single carrier signal shows limited envelope variations, this conveniently allows each power amplifier to be driven close to its saturation point, so that the power consumpion aboard the satellite is minimized. when the link budget is good enough, it is possible to increase the spectral efficiency of the system by using high order modulations. however, the

manuscript received december 27, 2013; revised april 19, 2014 and june 26, 2014; accepted june 27, 2014. date of publication july 9, 2014; date of current version august 20, 2014. the associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was r. dinis.

t. deleu and f. horlin are with the wireless communications group, department of optics, photonics, electromagnetism, radio communications, and acoustics (opera), faculty of applied sciences, université libre de bruxelles, 1050 brussels, belgium.

m. dervin is with thales alenia space, 31100 toulouse, france. k. kasai is with the department of communications and computer enineering, graduate school of science and engineering, tokyo institute of technology, tokyo 152 8550, japan. transmission channel includes non linear inter symbol intererence (isi) due to the combination of the non linear high power amplifier (hpa) aboard the satellite with linear filtering present in the channel. moreover, the larger the modulated carrier bandwidth, the more interference occurs due to the bandpass nature of the onboard channelizing filters. higherrder modulations are more sensitive to the non linear isi, so that compensation algorithms are necessary to achieve a high spectral and power efficiency with acceptable performance.

in the literature, the methods proposed to compensate for the non linear interference can be divided into two categories: equalization and pre distortion.

firstly, the non linear interference can be mitigated with an equalizer at the receiver side. if the channel is exactly known, the maximum a posteriori (map) symbol detection algorithm and the alternative maximum likelihood sequence detection algorithm can be perfectly defined. however, the complexity of these optimum algorithms increases exponentially with the channel length and modulation order, so that several subptimum algorithms have been proposed in the literature. for instance, in , the detection of the received signal is based on a reduced channel model described in combined with a channel shortening technique described in . adaptive noninear equalizers have been proposed in , , where a priori channel knowledge is not required. in , joint equalization and channel decoding is performed using gaussian processes. to take advantage of the channel coding gain, iterative turboqualization structures have also been considered , .

secondly, the channel non linear interference can be comensated by pre distortion at the transmitter side. this approach is particularly interesting in the forward link of a broadband satellite system, where it is preferred to concentrate the comutational load in the hub and relax as much as possible the complexity of the terminals. one usually uses the term signal (or waveform) pre distortion when it is located after the pulse shaping filter. this kind of pre distortion can be applied to comensate memoryless channels, as shown in , and refernces therein. the pre distorter is then an approximation of the inverse characteristic of the power amplifier at the transmitter side. this method can be analog or digitally implemented (see for example the adaptive implementations in and ). on the other hand, we refer to data pre distortion when a preistortion of the data symbols is applied prior to the pulse shaping. this allows compensating for isi and avoids out ofand emissions. a first approach is to consider a pre distorter based on the volterra model, a common tool to describe the input output relation of a non linear system with memory, as described in . the coefficients of the pre distorter are adaptively determined to minimize the mean square error (mse), as in , . the complexity of such pre distorters may be high and the convergence of adaptive algorithms may be slow, so that pre distortion methods based on reduced volterra modls have been studied in and references therein. the order inverse for non linear systems has been described in and applied to the satellite channel in . the order p pre distorter removes, up to the order p, all volterra terms from the channel model relating the received to the transmitted symbols (note that this algorithm can actually be applied to both pre distortion and equalization). another structure of interest relies on a lookp table (lut). in , the value of each pre distorted symbol is a function of the neighboring initial symbols, which can be calculated offline and stored in a lut. the pre computation of these values aims at minimizing the mse between the initial and the received symbols. the performance of this algorithm has been assessed for high order modulations in .

except for the order p inverse, existing pre distortion methds suffer from a performance loss due to their intrinsic strucure: pre distorters based on a volterra structure cannot cope with the huge number of coefficients required to theoretically represent the channel inverse and are therefore limited in order and memory. pre distorters based on lut have a number of entries exponentially growing with the modulation order so that the pre distorter length must be limited. in case of large channel length and high hpa non linearity, these pre distorters are therefore expected to perform poorly. this is also the case for the order p pre distorter since it creates higher order terms, that become more powerful than the cancelled terms. in this paper, we propose an iterative pre distortion algorithm, which can be seen as a pre distorter of infinite order and finite length. very large pre distorter lengths can be considered because the algoithm complexity computed per symbol is independent of this parameter. improved performance is therefore expected comared to state of the art pre distortion methods. the proposed scheme independently pre distorts successive symbol blocks. to pre distort each block of symbols, an iterative algorithm is used, aiming at minimizing the euclidian distance between the initial symbol and the received symbol sequence. based on the system model defined in section ii, we describe the proposed algorithm in section iii. a main concern of the algorithm design is its complexity, so that variations of the algorithm of much lower complexity are proposed in section iv. the perforance of the different algorithms is assessed in section v.

ii. system model

a. satellite channel

a block diagram of the satellite channel is depicted in fig. 1. at the transmitter, data bits are first encoded, interleaved and linearly modulated. in this work, only the highest modulation order defined in the dvb s2 standard is considered, which is the 32 amplitude/phase shift keying (apsk) modulation. based on the data symbols, denoted as s(n), the pre distorter produces the pre distorted symbols, denoted as x(n). the preistorted symbols are shaped with a square root raised cosine (srrc) filter and the resulting signal is transmitted to the satellite. at the satellite, the input multiplexer (imux) filter is a bandpass filter that selects the sub band to be amplified. the satellite hpa can be seen as a non linear memoryless device. the output multiplexer (omux) filter is also a bandpass filter, necessary to remove the out of band components produced by the power amplifier. at the receiver, the signal is filtered with a srrc filter and sampled to produce the received samples y(n). the demodulator performs a memoryless detection, asuming that residual interference after pre distortion behaves like additive white gaussian noise (awgn). it produces aosteriori statistics of the encoded bits, which are transmitted to the decoder after desinterleaving. the pre distortion block is assumed to have a perfect knowledge of the channel, and is dedicated to the mitigation of the non linear isi induced by the combination of the linear filters and the hpa. this is further detailed in the next section.

b. volterra model channel has been described in . the relation between the pre distorted symbols x(n) at the channel input and the received symbols y(n) is given by: (cid:2)

the coefficients h2m+1(n1 . . . n2m+1) are called the volterra kernels of the system. the first sum in (1) represents the differnt orders of the non linearity induced by the power amplifier. the second set of sums represents the memory of the system, which is theoretically infinite. in practice however, the length of the channel can be reasonably assumed of finite length. we deote the anti causal memory of the channel as l1 and the causal memory of the channel as l2. the total channel length is then denoted as lc = l1 + l2 + 1. in (1), each index ni varies thus from −l1 to l2. the received symbols are also corrupted by thermal noise w(n), which is supposed to behave like awgn.

the performance of pre distortion or equalization algorithms in a non linear satellite channel is usually quantified in terms of the total degradation , , . the total degradation, denoted as td, is defined as follows:

where obo is the hpa power backoff, lomux is the mean power loss in the omux filter, [eb/n0]nl req and [eb/n0]awgn are the average symbol energy over noise ratio required to achieve a given bit error rate (ber) or frame error rate (fer), in the non linear and awgn channels. as shown by (2), the total degradation depends on the obo, and the optimum obo which minimizes the total degradation can significantly be different depending on the considered pre distortion technique, as shown in , , . pre distortion techniques must therefore be compared based on the minimum total degradation they can reach.

iii. per block iterative pre distortion

we consider the pre distortion of length n symbol blocks, assuming that the transmitter has perfect knowledge of the channel. for a given block, we denote by s the vector with eleents comprising a symbol block: s = [s(1) . . . s(n )]. for each symbol block, the pre distorter produces a modified symbol block of length n , denoted by the vector x = [x(1) . . . x(n )]. at the receiver, n samples are also gathered in a vector of size n , denoted by y = [y(1) . . . y(n )]. in addition, we denote by y(x) the vector y of the received symbols when the block x is sent at the channel input. in this section, we propose an algorithm that precodes the block x so that (cid:4)y−s(cid:4)2 is minimized. since the optimal compensation of a finite length channel is of infinite length, n should be as large as possible. however, n cannot be too large to prevent too high latency. in this work, we take n equal to the number of symbols in the physical layer frame as defined in the dvb s2 standard (a few thousand symbols). note that the length of the block y should be equal to n +lc −1. however, memoryless detection is applied on consecutive received symbols, so that the symols y(−l1), . . . y(−1) and y(n +1), . . . y(n +l2) can be neglected. the pre distorter minimizes the euclidian distance assuming a noiseless channel. since the awgn is independent of the transmitted sequence, this also minimizes the mse at the receiver in presence of awgn. the vector y can be developed using (1). however, there is no straightforward derivation of the block x that minimizes (cid:4)y−s(cid:4)2. we therefore propose an iterative algorithm to determine the pre distorted block x. each iteration of the algorithm is divided into n steps, respectively focused on consecutive symbols of the block of interest. the pre distorted block after step j of iteration k is denoted as xk,j = [xk,j(1) . . . xk,j(n )], where only the jth pre distorted value is modified and is chosen to minimize (cid:4)y−s(cid:4)2 when xk,j is transmitted. all other pre distorted values are thus kept equal to their values from the previous step. for each iteration, xk,j(n) is mathematically expressed as follows. for the first step (j = 1),

and thereafter (j > 1),

note that xk,1(n) is calculated using the end values of the previous iteration, except for the first iteration where xk,1(n) is calculated using the un pre distorted values. the vector (cid:2)k,j is defined as the difference between y and s when the sequence obtained after step j of iteration k is transmitted: δ= y − s|∀i : x(i) = xk,j(i). (cid:2)k,j (5)

so that the convergence of the proposed algorithm is ensured. the term (cid:4)y − s(cid:4)2 minimized in (3) can be seen as a non linear function of the complex variable xk,j(n). the coefficients of this function can be found using the volterra model and depend on the fixed pre distorted values in (3). since the channel has finite length, (3) can be simplified as:

(cid:10) (cid:10)y(m)−s(m)|2 (cid:10) (cid:10) ∀i (cid:5)= j : the complexity of the algorithm is very high since it is necesary to successively find the minimum of n complex non linear functions for each iteration. moreover, the number of volterra coefficients in each equation can be very high in the case of high order non linearities. therefore, the pre distorted symbols defined in (3) are difficult to compute in practice. in the next subsection, we propose an algorithm of much lower complexity to compute the pre distorted symbols. we refer to this algorithm as the small variation algorithm.

the small variation algorithm has the same iterative structure as the algorithm presented in the previous subsection. however, at step j of iteration k, it calculates a suboptimal value for xk,j(j) in a much less complex way. we first define δk,j as:

the variation from xk,j−1(j) to xk,j(j) is now considered as the unknown variable instead of xk,j(j) itself. the case j = 1 is not explicitly given anymore in the following derivations, as it is always similar to (3). the vector δk,j is defined as a zero vector of length n , except for the element j which is equal to δk,j, so that:

the equation can be simplified using the vector notation:

each element f nl k,j (n) represents the output n variation resultng from a variation of the input symbol j at step j during iteration k. the vector fnl k,j can be seen as a vector of functions depending on the scalar variable δk,j. inspecting (1) and (12), it can be mathematically computed that each element f nl k,j (n) takes the form: where the coefficients an k,j(m1, m2) depend on the volterra coefficients and on the sequence of pre distorted symbols. for the sake of clarity, appendix a gives some examples for the coefficients an k,j(m1, m2) in the case of simple volterra models consisting of only a single volterra coefficient. in the general case of a channel depending on several volterra coefficients, the value of an k,j(m1, m2) can be obtained by first computing the value of an k,j(m1, m2) corresponding to each volterra coefficient taken independently and then by summing all the obtained values.

the small variation algorithm is based on the assumption k,j (n) can be approximated by keeping

that each function f n l only its linear dependency on δk,j:

this will be more likely the case for small values of δk,j. denoting flin k,j (δk,j), ak,j(1, 0), and ak,j(0, 1) the vectors k,j (n), an obtained with elements f lin k,j(0, 1), with n varying from 1 to n , we have: k,j(1, 0) and an

instead of calculating the value δopt variation algorithm calculates δlin k,j from (11), the small

the objective function (cid:4)y(xk,j−1) − s + fnl in (13) is ap,j proximated by a second order equation, given by (cid:4)(cid:2)k,j−1 + (cid:4)2. using partial derivatives, the optimum value of δk,j flin k,j that minimizes (17), can be found by solving a system of two linear equations with two unknowns (the real and imaginary parts of δk,j), which makes the calculation much easier than minimizing the exact non linear equation. the main difficulty raised by the proposed algorithm is the complexity to assess the parameters ak,j(m1, m2) as they depend on all volterra coefficients. this problem is addressed in section iv. (cid:4)

c. linearity assumption

k,j is computed based on the approximation (15), which is only valid for small values of δlin k,j . in practice, we consider that the applied variation δapplied has at least to decrease the euclidian distance between the initial and the received symbols. mathematically, this is expressed as: k,j

taking δapplied k,j does not ensure that (18) is verified at each step since the linear assumption may not be met. therefore, we consider instead that the applied variation is given by: = δlin

k,j where γ is a real number in the interval [0,1]. it is proven in appendix b that γδlin k,j is a sub optimum solution of the second order approximation of the objective function. this means that:

at each step of the algorithm, it is possible to define a value of γ small enough to meet the linear approximation (15), so that the sub optimum solution of (17) becomes also a sub optimum solution of (13), which means that δapplied satisfies (18). howver, finding the exact value of γ minimizing (13) is complex. therefore, we follow an approach similar to the trust region method described in , where the maximum possible norm of the applied variation |δapplied | is limited to a pre defined k,j value δmax. the value of γ is therefore chosen as follows:

if the so obtained γ and the resulting δapplied does not meet (18), no variation is applied at the given step. the value of δmax is a trade off between convergence speed and maximum achievable performance, as shown in section iv.

besides the iterative pre distortion algorithm, a linear filer can be applied to the transmitted signal to remove the linear interference caused by the channel. the iterative preistortion algorithm includes this linear filter as part of the channel. intuitively, this improves the convergence of the preistortion algorithm because the optimum values of the preistorted symbols are closer to the values of the un pre distorted symbols. note that this filter could alternatively be applied at the receiver. this would keep the peak to average power ratio (papr) lower at the transmitter and limit the induced higher order terms (see ). however, this would also amplify the noise on the channel deeps. in this work, we stick to the transmitter alternative.

the algorithm presented in the previous section is rather theoretical, as the number of volterra coefficients can be very large. we now present more practical methods to calculate the coefficients an k,j(0, 1), which are necessary to calculate δlin k,j . we propose three methods to compute these coefficients. the first has arbitrarily high precision, so that it can be considered as an exact and practical method to calculate an k,j(0, 1). the two other methods calculate only approximations of these coefficients, but are less complex than the first method. as discussed in previous section, it is also necessary to check after each step of the algorithm that the linearity assumption is met. in the final part of this section, we discuss how this verification constraint can be relaxed to further decrease the algorithm complexity. the coefficients an

k,j(0, 1) can be estimated by the following procedure. at step j of iteration k, the channel outputs are calculated that result from three different channel input variations:

where (cid:3)r and (cid:3)i are respectively small real and pure imaginary numbers. the respective channel outputs are denoted as y(n), yr(n) and yi(n). if (cid:3)r and (cid:3)i are chosen sufficiently small, there is a linear relation between the input and output variations:

for each n, (23) forms a set of two equations with two unnowns, an k,j(0, 1), so that they can easily be estimated. only lc sets of equations need to be solved due to the finite channel length assumption. the smaller (cid:3)r and (cid:3)i, the more accurate the calculation. this method still has a high complexity since three simulations of the channel are required at each step of each iteration.

to simulate the channel, the pre distortion block needs to oversample the signal by several times the symbol rate in order to avoid spectral aliasing from the non linear interference. for channels with large memory, the channel simulations can reuire a high complexity. in the following sections, we describe methods to obtain approximations of the coefficients an k,j(1, 0) and an

k,j(0, 1) with a lower complexity.

b. calculations of the coefficients an based on a reduced volterra model k,j(0, 1)

k,j(0, 1) can be computed by summing the contribution of each volterra coefficient. to decrease the algorithm complexity, they can instead be approxmated by summing the contributions of only the most signifiant volterra coefficients. let us consider the generic volterra coefficient h2m+1(n1 . . . n2m+1). volterra coefficients that do not have at least one index equal to n − j can be neglected, since only the symbol j is modified. to further decrease the number of volterra coefficients, an approximated value of an k,j(m1, m2) can be calculated by truncating the non linearity order and by limiting the channel length. truncating the channel length to a given value l(cid:10) c implies that only the volterra coefficients h2m+1(n1 . . . n2m+1) for which each index ni satisfies |ni| ≤ l(cid:10) c are considered, with m ≤ (p (cid:10) k,j(m1, m2) = 0 for |n − j| > − 1/2). moreover, an c l(cid:10) c. even by truncating the channel length and the non linearity order, the number of coefficients can still be very large so that different approximations can be adopted to further decrease the number of coefficients, such as the ones proposed in . in this paper, we limit the number of coefficients by only considering the ones depending on maximum 2 different indexes. c and to a given order p (cid:10) the idea of this approximation is to pre compute the values of an k,j(0, 1) and to store them in a look up k,j(1, 0) depends on the symbols [xk,j−1(n − table. since an l2) . . . xk,j−1(n + l1)], which take on continuous values, an infinite number of pre computed table entries would need to be stored. therefore, an approximation of an k,j(1, 0) is calculated by rounding each value in [xk,j−1(n − l2) . . . xk,j−1(n + l1)] to the closest value in c, where c = {c1, c2 . . . cp } is a set of p complex numbers. considering the channel length l(cid:10) c, approximately p l(cid:2) c values need to be stored. to avoid the complexity of rounding each pre distorted symbol to the closest value in c, a further approximation consists in calculating the coefficients an k,j(0, 1) using the initial symbols [s(n − l2) . . . s(n + l1)] instead of the pre distorted symbols [xk,j−1(n − l2) . . . xk,j−1(n + l1)]. this means that the aproximated linear coefficients are considered to be independent of the iteration number k.

d. alternative to the calculation of the remaining coefficients an

once the precoded symbols are updated using the lower complexity algorithms proposed in section iii b and c, it is important to check the linearity assumption based on which the algorithms rely. this can be simply done by simulating the actual channel, but we wanted to avoid that in section iii b and c for complexity reasons. a pragmatic approach to keeping the low complexity advantage is to check the linearity assumpion only at the end of each iteration by a single channel simulation. we consider that the linearity assumption is met if the mse decreases after each iteration of the algorithm. when the euclidian distance stops decreasing, the algorithm is stopped and the pre distorted values of the previous iteration are kept as the final values.

in this subsection, the complexity of the small variation algoithm is compared to that of its reduced complexity alternatives. in the following, δk,j and δ∗ k,j are replaced by (cid:11)(δk,j) and (cid:12)(δk,j) in (15), and the coefficients an k,j(1, 0) and an k,j(0, 1) are accordingly modified. this simple notational change allows a (small) complexity decrease. the algorithm consists in k iterations of n steps. at each step, the initial algorithm and the reduced complexity algorithms all require the following operations:

k,j as defined in (16). the computation of the norm of this vector is obtained by summing the norm of each element of the vector (cid:2)k,j−1 + flin k,j . it can be shown that this necessiates 10 lc multiplications and 5(lc − 1) additions. (cid:129) find the minimum of (17). using partial derivatives, this requires the inversion of a 2 × 2 (real) matrix, 4 multipliations, and 2 additions.

(cid:129) update the channel outputs for the next step (in fact calculate (cid:2)k,j from (cid:2)k,j−1 using an k,j(0, 1) and the applied variation). this requires 4lc multiplications and 4lc additions. k,j(1, 0), an

the complexity to determine the linear coefficients depends

on the chosen algorithm:

(cid:129) the complexity of the algorithm using the volterra model depends on the number of considered volterra coefficients and on the considered non linearity order. a volterra coefficient of order p requires 4p multiplications and 2 additions. by truncating the channel length to l(cid:10) c, each of the l(cid:10) c)(p−1) c outputs depends on approximately (l(cid:10) coefficients of order p.

(cid:129) the method based on channel simulations necessitates three channel simulations. at each channel simulation, lc outputs need to be calculated. this requires simulating the power amplifier output with 2lckosf input values, where kosf is the oversampling factor. the output of the power amplifier can be obtained by interpolating the am am and am pm characteristics or assessed using a polynomial approximation. the number of operations to calculate the power amplifier output is then approxmately proportional to the chosen non linearity order. the complexity of the convolution with the linear filters also needs to be taken into account, which is proportional to l2 k,j(1, 0) and an k,j(0, 1) from the channel simulations, 4 additions and 4 divisions need to be done. ckosf. to calculate the coefficients an

(cid:129) the method based on look up tables needs to round 4l(cid:10) c values to the closest value in the look up table since the c complex outputs depend on 2l(cid:10) l(cid:10) c inputs.

the method based on the look up tables is the least complex. the method based on the approximated volterra model is less complex than the method based on channel simulations only if the number of volterra coefficients is very small, so that very short channel lengths must be considered. this will be further discussed in the next section.

v. numerical results

we consider 32 apsk symbols and srrc shaping and receiver filters. the traveling wave tube (twt) amplifier is the one proposed in the dvb s2 standard with am am and am pm characteristics given in fig. 2. the imux and omux characteristics are also the ones proposed in the dvb s2 stanard and are given in figs. 3 and 4 respectively. the low density parity check (ldpc) encoder and the interleaver are the ones defined in the dvb s2 standard for the 32 apsk modulation and the code rate is equal to 4/5. as discussed in section ii a, n is equal to the number of symbols in a plframe of the dvb s2 standard, which is equal to 12960 for the case of 32 apsk modulation. fig. 5 illustrates the mse between the initial and the received symbols after each iteration of the smallariation algorithm described in section ii for different values fig. 2. am am and am pm characteristics of the hpa.

fig. 5. mean square error (mse) after each iteration of the small variation algorithm, symbol rate = 36 mbaud, roll off = 0.1.

fig. 6. mean square error (mse) after each iteration of the small variation algorithm, using the convergence method described in section iii d, symbol rate = 36 mbaud, roll off = 0.1.

the linear zero forcing filter is placed at the transmitter. at each step of the algorithm, it is checked that the variation δapplied decreases the square error so that the algorithm always k,j converges at least to a local optimum. it can be observed that the value δmax has no impact on the value of the local optimum but controls the convergence speed of the algorithm. too small values of δmax obviously decrease the convergence speed of the algorithm, while too large values of δmax increase the number of steps where no variation is applied, so that the convergence speed also decreases.

fig. 6 illustrates the performance reached when the square error decrease is verified at the end of each iteration only, as decribed in section iii d. it can be observed that the asymptotic performance now depends on the considered δmax. sufficiently small values of δmax (0.05 and 0.1) allow to reach similar performance as in previous figure, with a verification method of much lower complexity. table i shows the performance loss associated to the reduced complexity alternatives of the small variation algorithm, proposed in section iii b and c. for both approximations, the performance loss decreases with the ibo. considering l(cid:10) c = 5 allows a small performance increase compared to l(cid:10) c = 3. slightly better performance is achieved with the method based on look up tables, which necessitates a look up table of l(cid:10) c entries. the method based on c a reduced volterra model however does not require any preomputation and still allows a decrease in complexity compared to the method based on channel simulations. considering l(cid:10) c = 3, each step of each iteration requires about 60 multiplications and 30 additions, relying on the fact that some products of the pre distorted symbols can be reused to calculate different channel outputs. using channel simulations with l(cid:10) c = 3 and an oversampling factor equal to 8, 40 samples need to be filtered by the shaping and imux filters, interpolated, and reltered by the omux filter and the receiver filter. considering that the shaping and imux filters (and omux and receiver filters) have an impulse response larger than 40 samples, at least 402 multiplications are involved for each convolution. clearly, the complexity is lower using the volterra model instead of channel simulations. two state of the art (soa) algorithms are considered in the following figures. the first algorithm is based on memory polynomials, where the pre distorter is a reduced volterra system presented in . third order volterra coeffiients and a pre distorter length l(cid:10) c = 9 have been considered. the second algorithm is the one proposed in , where the value of each pre distorted symbol is a function of the neighoring un pre distorted symbols. all possible combinations are pre computed offline and stored in a look up table. a preistorter length l(cid:10) c = 3 is considered so that 323 entries are stored in the look up table. among all pre distortion methods, this approach has the lowest real time complexity, since only one memory access per symbol needs to be performed. the perormance of the reduced complexity alternatives of the smallariation algorithm are assessed assuming a channel length also equal to l(cid:10)

fig. 7 gives the ber performance considering a symbol rate of 36 mbaud, a roll off factor of 0.1 and a fixed obo of 2 db. it can be seen that the proposed algorithm and its reducedomplexity alternatives outperform the soa algorithms by several db. at ber = 10−6, the small variation algorithm approaches the awgn channel by less than 0.5 db. however, a fair comparison must be based on the total degradation, taking into account the optimum obo for each pre distortion technique and the power loss in the omux filter, as discussed in section i b. in the following total degradation curves, the target ber is equal to 10−5. fig. 7. ber performance of the small variation algorithm (sva) and statef the art pre distortion methods, symbol rate = 36 mbaud, roll off = 0.1, obo = 2 db.

fig. 8. total degradation for small variation algorithm (sva) and state ofhe art pre distortion methods, symbol rate = 25 mbaud, roll off = 0.3.

in fig. 8, the symbol rate is equal to 25 mbaud and the rollff factor is equal to 0.3, as considered in for 32 apsk modulation. in this case, the side lobes of the shaping and receiver filters are small and few interference occurs with the imux and omux filters. therefore, even the full complexity small variation algorithm only allows a small performance improvement compared to soa algorithms (about 0.3 db).

in fig. 9, the symbol rate is equal to 36 mhz and the roll off factor is equal to 0.1, simulating therefore a higher interference scenario. as a result, the total degradation using the smallariation algorithm is higher for every obo when compared to the previous case. the small variation algorithm and the reduced complexity alternatives outperform the state of the art algorithms. about 1 db is gained on the optimum total degraation point with the full complexity algorithm. the loss of the reduced complexity alternatives on the optimum total degradaion point is on the other hand approximately equal to 0.2 db.

fig. 10 considers an increased symbol rate equal to 38 mhz and a reduced roll off factor equal to 0.05, still increasing the impact of the imux and omux filters. the gain compared to the state of the art algorithms is higher than in previous case and is about 1.5 db. the reduced complexity alternatives reach again almost the same optimum total degradation. this paper proposes a new iterative pre distortion algorithm suited to the use of high order modulations on a highly noninear satellite communication channel. the algorithms aims at minimizing the euclidian distance between the transmitted and received symbols. the pre distorted symbols are updated at each iteration based on a linear approximation of the channel output variation, which is only valid if the symbol update is kept sufficiently local. however, a major issue of the alorithm is the complexity involved in the estimation of the linear relation between the channel input and output variations. two approximations have been proposed to strongly decrease the algorithm complexity. the first one relies on a reduced volterra model and the second one is based on the use of look up tables. the performance improvement brought by the algorithm, compared to state of the art algorithms, represents several db on the mse and up to 1.5 db on the link budget with 32 apsk modulation. roll off factors as low as 0.05 have been considered. the performance improvement is obtained at the cost of a higher complexity and higher latency, since the pre distorted symbols are calculated during the plframe transmission, while it is usually implemented in the current dvb s2 modems based on a offline creation of a lut (static or dynamic). the choice of the pre distortion algorithm is therefore a performance/complexity trade off. future work will include the algorithm extension to the case where more than one carrier is amplified by the same power amplifier. if the channel is known and if all signals are transmitted from the same hub, a pre distortion algorithm similar to the one proposed here for a single carrier per channel can be applied.

calculation of the coefficients an

for some simple volterra models

let us first consider a channel consisting only of the thirdrder volterra coefficient h3(0, 0, 0). each element of the difference between the output y(xk,j−1 + δk,j) and the output y(xk,j−1) is given by:

the other outputs are not modified since the channel is memoyless. the different coefficients an k,j(m1, m2) can be directly estimated from (24), and are given in the second column of table ii. the third and fourth columns of table ii give the non zero values for an k,j(m1, m2), considering a channel with a single volterra coefficient respectively equal to h3(1, 0, 0) and h3(0, 1, 2). it should be noticed that more than one input is now modified, due to the memory of the system. moreover, the output variation for h3(0, 1, 2) is linear in δk,j because all indexes of this volterra coefficient are different. therefore, we have that the second line of (25) is negative and that: (cid:2) c. burnet and w. cowley, "intersymbol interference cancellation for 16qam transmission through nonlinear channels," in proc. 10th ieee digit. signal process. workshop/2nd signal process. educ. workshop, oct. 2002, pp. 322 326.

m. schetzen, the volterra and wiener theories of nonlinear systems.

a. zhu and t. brazil, "an adaptive volterra predistorter for the linearizaion of rf high power amplifiers," in proc. ieee mtt s int. microw. symp. dig., 2002, vol. 1, pp. 461 464.

s. benedetto and e. biglieri, "digital transmission over nonlinear chanels," in principles of digital transmission: with wireless applications. new york, ny, usa: springer verlag, 2002, ser. information technolgy: transmission, processing, storage, pp. 725 772.