joint optimization of throughput and packet drop rate for delay sensitive applications in tdd satellite network coded systems

mohammad esmaeilzadeh, student member, ieee, neda aboutorab, member, ieee, and parastoo sadeghi, senior member, ieee

abstract—in this paper, we consider the issue of throughput and packet drop rate (pdr) optimization as two performance metrics for delay sensitive applications in network coded time division duplex (tdd) satellite systems with large round trip times (rtts). we adopt random linear network coding (rlnc) and our purpose is to obtain the optimum rlnc based transission strategy. we start with a single user case and propose a systematic framework to investigate the advantage of using feedback by comparing feedback free and feedback schemes. showing analytically that the feedback free scheme gives better performance for our system of interest, we extend it to multi user broadcast case. to this end, we consider a number of different broadcast scenarios and optimize the system parameters such that the best overall performance is achieved. furthermore, the complicated interplay of the mean throughputs and pdrs of different users with different packet erasure conditions is discussed. finally, it is shown that the optimized feedback free rlnc broadcast scheme works close enough to an idealistic rlnc scheme, where the complete and immediate knowledge about the reception status of all users is assumed to be available at the sender.

index terms—network coding, satellite communications, delay

sensitive applications, time division duplex channels.

d elivery of high data rate content with strict delay

requirements is a constant challenge in many wireless communication systems. this is often due to multipath fading and shadowing effects, which eventually manifest themselves in the form of packet erasures. an example is live video broadcast to a group of wireless users in packet erasure channels. due to different erasure events at different users, the sender is faced with various packet demands at any given time and hence choosing packets for transmission is not a trivial matter. this task becomes particularly difficult in time division duplex (tdd) systems with inherently large round trip times (rtts), such as satellite networks and underwater acoustic communications. in this case, the sender and receiver cannot transmit at the same time and providing feedback to the sender,

manuscript received april 2, 2013; revised october 13, 2013. the editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was t. ho.

information sciences and engineering, the australian national university, canberra, 0200, act, australia (e mail: {mohammad.esmaeilzadeh, neda.aboutorab, parasoo.sadeghi}@anu.edu.au).

this work was supported under the australian research council discovery projects and linkage projects funding schemes (project nos. dp120100160 and lp100100588). for either informing it about the missing packets at each receiver or estimating the channel states and properties, can be extremely costly. consequently, protocols relying on frequent feedback, such as traditional automatic repeat request (arq) protocols and many adaptive or online schemes (e.g. , ), are out of the question for such systems.

instead, block based transmission schemes such as fountain codes (e.g. lt and raptor codes) and random linear network coding (rlnc) are more suitable for operaions under limited feedback conditions, as in tdd systems with large rtt. while these schemes are all asymptotically throughput optimal , rlnc is more preferred as it allows simple extension to general networks by re encoding at interediate nodes , but fountain codes only apply to end to end coding.

rlnc refers to combining a block of m packets using random coefficients from a finite field with diverse range of applications . in a rateless broadcast scenario using rlnc, the sender then keeps transmitting different packet combinations until all receivers collect m linearly independent coded packets and can hence obtain the block of m original packets. this interval is referred to as the completion time. a lower completion time signifies a higher data throughput. however, in delay sensitive applications, the sender transmits a certain number of rlnc packets for any given block of packets and then moves onto a new block. undecoded packets will have to be dropped at the receivers upon the start of a new block. the following fundamental questions exist in tdd systems that use rlnc: whether should the receivers provide feedback to the sender about their packet reception status? and if yes, how often? also can the sender utilize this precious feedback to optimize the number of coded packet transmissions such that the average throughput is maximized or the packet drop rate (pdr) is minimized?

for tdd systems using rlnc transmission scheme, the authors in considered optimization of the feedback freuency for a single user case and then for the broadcast case . their objective was to minimize the completion time for delivering a block of m packets to all users in a rateless fashion. that is, they did not consider a delivery deadline nor aimed to minimize the pdr. instead, they assumed a priori that the transmission is broken into rounds. at the end of each round feedback should be provided from each user about the number of linearly independent coded packets still needed (referred to as the remaining degrees of freedom or rdof). based on this rdof, the sender then decided about the number of coded packets to transmit in the next round before waiting to listen to another feedback. the number of coded packets for each rdof were optimized such that the average completion time was minimized.

in separate works, the authors in , considered the problem of pdr reduction in tdd satellite systems using rlnc, and utilized rlnc to achieve a pre specified level of reliability for underwater acoustic communications. however, given strict delay requirements of the considered applications, a priori assumptions on the use of feedback were imposed, where considered availability of frequent feedback via a low delay terrestrial reverse link and , considered feedback free transmission schemes.

in this paper we consider a more general problem in two fronts. first, we wish to jointly maximize throughput and minimize the pdr within the delay requirements of the application and the imposed physical limitations of the channel such as rtt. this joint optimization is more desirable for realizing high data rate delay sensitive wireless applications. we note that there is a trade off between the two objectives. that is, for reducing pdr more coded packets of the same block should be sent so that each receiver is more likely to decode before the deadline. however, this results in increasing the completion time. so the optimum solution is not trival, especially when multiple users have different pdr and throughput requirements or experience different packet erasure conditions. second, for our joint optimization problem, we do not assume a priori whether feedback should be used or not in the system. instead, we consider both feedback free and feedback schemes in a unified systematic framework. hence, comparison of the two schemes in terms of their throughput and pdr performance becomes possible under a variety of system parameters, such as the number of packets in a block, packet erasure probability, feedback erasure probability, rtt, delivery deadline, transmission rate, packet length, rlnc field size, etc. we consider both normal rlnc and systematic rlnc (srlnc) , where in the latter all m packets in a block are first broadcast uncoded before switching to normal rlnc transmission. similar to the approach in and to gain insights into the system performance, we first solve the problem for the single user case and obtain the optimal throughput pdr trade offs of rlnc and srlnc schemes. then, extend the analysis to broadcasting to multiple users.

to assess the performance of the proposed schemes, we compare our results with round robin (rr), as a simple scheduling scheme, with lt codes as a widely used fountain code, and also with an idealistic srlnc (isrlnc) scheme, where we assume that immediate knowledge about the recepion status of all users is available at the sender.

the main contributions and findings of this paper can be summarized as follows. first, we propose a systematic framework to analytically study rlnc for delay sensitive applications over tdd erasure channels. then, employing the proposed framework, we formulate the mean throughput and pdr for rlnc and srlnc schemes, and compare these schemes under feedback free or feedback scenarios. moreover, the impact of different values of rtt and delivery deadline on the performance of these schemes is investigated. we observe that for the practical values of rtt and delivery deadline in satellite streaming applications, the feedback free srlnc scheme outperforms the other investigated schemes. second, we highlight the trade off between the mean throughput and pdr and propose a joint optimization of these performance metrics for the feedback free broadcasting schemes. furhermore, we present various system design approaches and demonstrate their effects on the performances of users with different packet erasure conditions. finally, among srlnc schemes, the optimum broadcast transmission strategies are obtained, and then compared with the reference schemes.

the rest of this paper is organized as follow. in the next section, we introduce our system model. in section iii, the formulations of throughput and pdr as the performance metics for the single user case are provided, and then extended to broadcasting to multiple users in section iv. section v provides the numerical results. finally, we conclude the paper in section vi.

ii. system model

the system model consists of a satellite sender and a set of n on earth users. the sender is supposed to deliver a block of m data packets, denoted by m = {x1, ..., xm }, to the users before a specific delivery deadline td. we assume each data packet is independently useful to the users1 and is composed of n information bits. moreover, we assume the transmission rate of the sender is r bits per second (bps).

the channels between the sender and the users are assumed to be independent tdd channels (that is, nodes cannot transit and receive at the same time) with packet error rates (pers) of pei , 1 ≤ i ≤ n . in addition, it is assumed that channels are subject to large and equal rtts, denoted by trt. this is a valid assumption in satellite communications as the distances between the satellite and the on earth users are large and almost equal.

moreover, feedback packets are assumed to be composed

of nf b bits, with erasure probability of pef b .

a. random linear network coding (rlnc)

throughout this paper we employ two different types of rlnc, normal rlnc and systematic rlnc , , , , , which are referred to as rlnc and srlnc, respectively.

1) coding: in the rlnc scheme, the sender only transmits coded packets, which are of the form ck = m=1 amkxm. the coding coefficients amk are chosen randomly from a finite field of size q (fq), and are sent along with packet's header and the linear combination of m data packets. therefore, a coded packet is composed of l = h + n + m g bits, where h represents the number of bits allocated for the packet's header, n is the number of bits for the linear combination of all m data packets, and g = log2q is the number of bits used to represent the randomly chosen coding coefficients for each data packet. in the srlnc scheme, in an initial transmission phase, referred to as the systematic phase of transmission, the original m data packets are transmitted uncoded once. then in the (cid:2)m remark 1: it should be noted that the uncoded packets are composed of lu = h + n bits. however, in order to have standard packet lengths in the system when studying srlnc, we consider the length of both coded and uncoded packets to be l bits and refer to them, in general, as rlnc packets in the rest of this paper.

remark 2: rlnc is not expected to outperform srlnc and the complexities of these schemes are almost similar. however, since rlnc is more widespread compared to srlnc and its analysis is important on its own, and also the fact that analysis of srlnc is better understood when considered in contrast to that of rlnc, we opt to study both schemes here.

2) decoding: we start our explanation on the decoding

definition 1: a received rlnc packet is said to provide is linearly

one degree of independent from previously received packets.

a user, in order to decode the original m data packets in a block, requires to collect m dof. however, this may require more than m transmissions of uncoded/coded rlnc packets as the packets are subject to erasures and also it is probable that some received coded packets are not linearly independent from previously received ones.

definition 2: for each user, we define the remaining dof (rdof) at each time instance as the number of extra linearly independent packets that are needed by that user to be able to decode the entire set of m data packets. it is clear that the rdof is equal to m at the beginning of the transmission, and rdof of zero means that the block of m data packets can be completely decoded.

having defined dof and rdof, it can be inferred that any successful reception of uncoded packets in the systematic phase of the srlnc scheme will reduce the rdof by one. however, for the coded packets, the rdof reduction with each successful reception is not definite. the probability for the rdof reduction upon successful reception of a coded packets is discussed next.

3) effect of field size q on the rdof reduction: in most of the existing works , , , , , , by assuming a very large field size q, the coded packets are considered to be always linearly independent. however, this simplifying assumption is not always practical due to the increased computational complexities of the decoding operations and the amount of overhead imposed by large q. the authors in were among the first to formulate the effect of field size q in rlnc schemes by giving the probability of rdof reduction in terms of the current rdof and the size of q. this derivation on the effect of field size was used in , , , and we utilize it here as well. by using the transition probability matrix introduced in , we define p w q (x, y) as the probability that w successful received coded packets over fq reduce the rdof from x to y. here, we explain the transmission model for the singleser case, and extend it to the multi user case in section iv. the channel is considered to be tdd with large rtt. the tdd nature of the channel forces the sender to stop its transmissions to be able to listen to the transmitted feedback from the user. furthermore, large rtt makes the use of feedback to be extremely costly. as a result, it is not always beneficial for the sender to wait to listen to feedback after each single transmission. hence similar to , we assume that the transmission is divided into a number of transmission rounds.

definition 3: a round of transmission is characterized by two stages, sending a number of rlnc packets back to back, and then waiting for feedback. the number of rlnc packets is predesigned for every rdof value, and the feedback is then used to update the rdof for the next round of transmission. the duration of a round of it can be easily inferred that transmission is lower bounded by trt.

unlike , where these transmission rounds were unlimtedly repeated until the rdof becomes zero, in our model the existence of delivery deadline limits the number of transission rounds. for instance, if we consider trt to be equal to 250 ms (i.e. a geo satellite system) and td to be equal to 550 ms (i.e. live video streaming applications), then it is clear that at most two transmission rounds are feasible. this limited number of transmission rounds in our model causes another important distinction compared to the existing schemes with no delivery deadline , as in our model the feedback after the final round of transmission is not useful and thus, not required. this can lead to a better performance by allowing the sender to either start the transmission of the next block of packets trt seconds ahead in time or transmit more coded 2 packets before the deadline.

in this paper, we study two transmission schemes, oneound and two round, in a unified systematic framework2. the one round scheme, as shown in fig. 1(a), is in fact a feedback free scheme, where for each block of m packets, ns ≥ m rlnc packets are transmitted back to back. once the ns transmissions are completed, the transmission of the next block of packets is started. in the two round scheme, as depicted in fig. 1(b), again ns ≥ m rlnc packets are transmitted first, then the sender waits for the feedback from the user to update its rdof, denoted by j. in case the feedback is not received, the sender assumes that the rdof has remained unchanged, i.e. j = m . if j = 0, the next block will be transmitted. otherwise, nj ≥ j coded packets will be transmitted back to back in the second round, and then the sender switches to the transmission of the next block of packets.

the onend two round schemes both need to satisfy the deadline requirement, i.e. the total transmission time, denoted by ttot, should not exceed the deadline td, as illustrated in figs. 1(d) and 1(e). therefore, considering the propagation delay of trt 2 and the transmission times of an rlnc packet, nf b tp = l r , we define feasible transmission schemes as follows: r , and a feedback packet, tf b = fig. 1. block diagrams and transmission timelines for the single user case onend two round srlnc schemes and also isrlnc scheme (#txs stands for the total number of transmissions). by considering all the ns packets in (a) and (d) to be either rlnc coded, lt coded or uncoded, the diagrams for the one round rlnc, lt and rr schemes will be obtained, respectively. in (f), the (cid:2) symbols are used to show that the sender has immediate knowledge about the success or failure of previous transmissions at these points in time, i.e. right before the transmission of next packet. isrlnc, lt and rr schemes are explained in section v a.

definition 5: a two round rlnc or srlnc transmission scheme with nc parameters m , ns, nj (1 ≤ j ≤ m ) and q is called feasible if ns ≥ m , nj ≥ j and ttot = tr1+tr2 ≤ td. here, tr1 and tr2 represent the transmission times of the first and second rounds and are equal to nstp + trt + tf b and njtp + trt

throughout this paper, we consider two performance metics, mean throughput and pdr, which will be denoted by e{η}3 and pd, respectively. for a user, we define e{η} as the expected number of data bits correctly decoded by that user per time unit before the deadline, and pd as the probability that a packet is not decoded by that user before the deadline. in the next section, we start with formulating these two metrics for the single user case, and then will extend them to the multiser case in section iv.

a summary of symbols and parameters used in this paper

iii. mean throughput and pdr formulationingle user case

in this section we focus on the single user case. before discussing various schemes, we start with introducing some common notations and formulations, which will be used throughout this section. yes

#txs=ns or rdof=0? no

transmit one coded packet

(c) isrlnc scheme

t = 0 receiver sender

tr2 m uncoded packets

at most: ns − m coded packets ▸ ▸ ▸

where pe is the per of the user.

for uncoded packets, we define psys(m, m) as the probaility of receiving m uncoded data packets out of m transissions in the systematic phase of transmission as

psys(m, m) is in fact the probability that the rdof reduces by m after sending m uncoded packets.

a. one round rlnc scheme

considering the sender is transmitting a feasible number of coded packets ns for the transmission of a block of m data packets, the end of each round, success state {s} and failure state {f }. if the transmission of ns coded packet brings down the user's rdof from m to zero (i.e. a successful/complete oneound transmission), the success state happens. otherwise, the failure state happens (i.e. a failure/incomplete one round transmission). the probabilities that each of these states occurs can be expressed as follows: (cid:6) two different states are possible at

from (5) and (6), the trade off between the mean throughput and pdr, which is mostly affected by number of packets and transmissions (m and ns), can be concluded. for example to achieve a lower pdr for a constant m , sending more rlnc packets, i.e. larger ns, is required. this improves ps, but at the cost of reducing ηs, which may result in degradation of e{η}.

moreover, it could be inferred from (5) and (6) that in the normal rlnc scheme, since the m required dof are not received at the user in state {f }, regardless of the value of rdof, the whole block of m data packets should be dropped without any contribution to the throughput. this motivates the idea of using srlnc, where in addition to sending coded packets, the original data packets are sent uncoded in the initial phase of transmission. since in section ii we have assumed that the information in each of the m packets in a block can be independently useful at the user, receiving even one of the m uncoded packets has its own contribution to improving the throughput and pdr. this will be taken into account in the next subsection.

for a feasible one round srlnc scheme, sending ns rlnc packets will again lead to either a complete (rdof = 0) or incomplete (rdof (cid:4)= 0) transmission, as shown in fig. 2(a). however, each of these two states can be further split into a number of sub states, depending on the number of successfully received uncoded packets in the systematic phase of transission. assuming that m uncoded packets are successfully received, the success and failure sub states, denoted by {s|m} (0 ≤ m ≤ m ) and {f |m} (0 ≤ m ≤ m − 1), respectively, happen with the following probabilities and throughput values (cid:8)

(11) fig. 2. state transition diagrams for srlnc schemes (tx: transmission). states represent the rdof. we consider pef b = 0 in (b).

the mean throughput, e{η}, and the probability of

thus, packets being dropped, pd, can be obtained as (cid:13) m(cid:3)

this transmission scheme is in fact a combination of the transmission schemes discussed in sections iii b and iii c in the sense that it behaves similar to the one round srlnc in the first round and similar to the two round rlnc, thereafter. hence, for a feasible two round srlnc scheme, the possible states are similar to the ones defined in section iii c, except that we also take into account their dependence on the number of successfully received uncoded data packets m. fig. 2(b) shows a special case of this scheme with pef b = 0. thus, the probabilities of the possible states can be expressed as

as an example, pj,f |m here represents the conditional probbility of an incomplete transmission with j > 0 rdof after the first round, given m successfully received uncoded packets in the initial phase of transmission. three terms are involved in this probability. the first term shows the probability of successfully receiving the feedback. the second term is the probability that the remaining ns − m transmissions in the first round can bring down the rdof from m − m to j, and the last term is the probability that nj transmissions in the second round cannot bring down the rdof to zero.

the throughput values for the above mentioned states can m m − m p (m − m, 0, ns − m )

m uncoded txs ns − m coded txs nj coded txs

(b) two round srlnc scheme

it is worth noting that pj,f |m and pf f,f |m are assumed zero here, since these states do not happen.

remark 3: the approach used in this section can be exended to the case with more than two rounds of transmission (provided that based on system parameters, e.g. td, trt, m and tp , more than two rounds of transmission is feasible). the only difference will be the fact that more possible intermediate states should be considered in fig. 2(b).

e. one round versus two round schemes

having obtained the performance metrics for the one round and two round schemes, now our goal is to find the best scheme among them for the values of trt corresponding to satellite transmissions.

with a closer look at the derived equations for e{η} and pd in (3) to (18), it can be seen that a number of parameters play important roles in these equations. these parameters can be categorized into three groups: channel enforced parameters, pe, pef b and trt; application enforced parameters, n, h, nf b, r and td; and nc design parameters, q, m , ns and nj, j = 1, ..., m . all of these parameters are common between the one round and two round schemes, except for the number of transmissions in the second round, nj, which is not defined for the one round schemes. due to this difference between the nc design parameters, the comparison of these schemes becomes far from trivial.

therefore, by considering both performance metrics conurrently, here we propose a framework that is capable of not only finding the best one round and two round transission schemes, but also comparing them regardless of the discrepancy in the nc design parameters. while this general framework can be exploited to investigate the effect of any of the channel enforced and application enforced parameters, we only investigate the effect of rtt and the deadline, i.e. trt and td. the approach will be explained for the one round and two round rlnc schemes, but it is valid for the srlnc schemes as well.

considering definitions 4 and 5, the minimum delivery deadlines that the one round and two round rlnc schemes can meet for fixed system parameters are td1 = m tp + trt 2 and td2 = 2m tp + 3 trt 2 + tf b, respectively, where for both schemes, we have set ns to be the minimum possible value, i.e. m . moreover, for the two round scheme, to make sure that the second round is always feasible, we have considered the worst case scenario where the rdof remains m after the first round. hence, the number of transmissions in the second round nm is also set to be equal to m .

it is clear that serving an application with the delivery deadline requirement of smaller than td1 is impossible. also, for td1 ≤ td < td2, since there is not enough time to send even the minimum number of transmissions in two rounds, only one round scheme is feasible. therefore, in order to compare these two schemes, we focus on cases with td ≥ td2, where both schemes are feasible.

in order to compare these schemes for such values of delivery deadline td, we jointly optimize the performance metrics, i.e. e{η} and pd, for our proposed schemes. thereore, this problem falls in the category of multi objective (more specifically, bi objective) optimization , and takes the following forms for the onend two round rlnc schemes, respectively:

it should be noted that m and q are also among the nc design parameters, but we consider them to have fixed values here and will discuss their effect on the system performance later in section v f.

as mentioned earlier, the solution to the optimization probems in (19) and (20) can denote a feasible transmission scheme if the conditions in definitions 4 and 5 are satisfied. now, among all feasible transmission schemes, a solution for each of the problems in (19) and (20) is called optimal, if it can maximize both of the objectives, i.e. e{η} and −pd, simultaneously. however, as explained in section iii a, there is a trade off between these two objectives and as a result, such optimal solutions do not exist for these problems. therefore, in order to solve the optimization problems, we propose to find pareto optimal solutions .

definition 6: a feasible solution is said to be a pareto optimal solution, if no other feasible solution with larger e{η} and smaller pd exists. it is worth noting that a pareto optimal solution forms one pareto optimal point in the objective space, i.e. the diagram of e{η} versus pd.

for comparing the one round and two round schemes, because a single optimal solution does not exist, we obtain and compare the pareto optimal points, which highlight the optimal trade offs between the mean throughput and pdr. there are various methods to obtain the pareto optimal solutions. one simple but exhaustive approach is to calculate e{η} and pd for all feasible values of x and then select all the pareto optimal solutions among them based on definition 6. this is possible for the one round scheme in (19), since there is only one variable, ns, with limited possible values4. however, this approach may not be computationally efficient for the two round scheme in (20), due to the number of variables. another possible approach is to combine the two objectives to relax the bi objective problem into a singlebjective problem. the most common technique to do this is the weighted sum method . by using this method, the problem in (20) can be rewritten as

it is shown in that solving the above problem for any desirable value of λ, 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1, will give a pareto optimal solution. therefore, we are able to obtain as many pareto optimal solutions as required by solving (21) for various values of λ. details on solving (21) are provided in appendix a. we also show through an example how this weighted sum approach is computationally more efficient than the exhaustive approach. therefore, we employ the exhaustive and weighted sum methods to obtain the pareto optimal solutions in the oneound and two round schemes, respectively. then we compare these schemes by observing the resulting pareto optimal points in the objective space.

as will be shown later in section v c, for satellite applicaions with large rtts, which are the target of this paper, the one round schemes result in superior performances compared to their two round counterparts. therefore, we focus on the one round schemes for the rest of this paper.

in this section, we extend our study from the single user case to a multi user broadcast case. we consider n users with independent erasure channels. here, for any set of parameters, e{η} and pd of each user for the one round rlnc and srlnc schemes can be computed by using (5) and (6), and (9) and (10), respectively. we denote the performance metrics of the i th user by e{ηi} and pdi.

now, from a system design perspective, we are interested in finding an appropriate operating point for the entire system. as mentioned earlier, a single optimal solution that maximizes e{η} and at the same time minimizes pd does not exist for a single user case. furthermore, a set of nc design parameters that gives a pareto optimal point for one user will not necessarily give a pareto optimal point for other users with different channel conditions. therefore, to obtain the operating point two steps are required. first, considering the performance metrics of all users jointly, which is achieved by using functions f (·) and g(·) to combine the throughputs and pdrs. second, imposing a constraint on one of these functions, so that the trade off between their values leads to one single solution. the choice of f (·) and g(·) along with the constraint is what we refer to as the required quality of service (qos). hence, having a predefined qos requirement, we form the optimization problem and obtain the nc design (21) parameters, ns, m and q, such that the system's operating point is optimized according to the required qos. we choose to put the constrains on the pdrs and opt to maximize the throughputs. thus, the general form of this problem can be written as

by solving this problem, we are in fact obtaining the optial rlnc (or srlnc) transmission strategy, based on the required qos defined by f (·), g(·) and pth. f (·) and g(·) functions, along with some practical broadcasting scenarios are discussed in the following subsection. while we only study four different choices of these functions, our framework is general and other choices can be used.

a. broadcasting scenarios with various qos criteria

1) scenario i, maximizing e{η} of a single user subject to a constraint on its pdr: in this scenario, we investigate how designing the system based on the qos requirement of a single user can affect the performance of the remaining users. therefore, considering k to be the index of the user of interest, f (·) and g(·) can be defined as f (e{η1}, · · · , e{ηn }) = e{ηk} (23) g(pd1 , · · · , pdn ) = pdk (24) 2) scenario ii, maximizing the mean of users' e{η} subect to constraints on pdr of all users: in this scenario, it is required that pdrs of all users do not exceed a predefined threshold and at the same time the mean e{η} of users is maximized. it can be easily inferred that if the pdr constraint is satisfied for the user with the worst per, it will be satisfied for rest of the users as well. thus, we can define the f (·) and g(·) functions in (22) as

3) scenario iii, maximizing the mean of users' e{η} subject to a constraint on the mean pdr: in this scenario, it is required that the mean e{η} of users be maximized, while the mean pdr is lower than a predefined threshold. therefore, f (·) can be similarly defined by (25) and g(·) takes the form (27)

4) scenario iv, maximizing the mean of users' e{η} subject to a constraint on the geometric mean pdr: as we will see in section v, the pdr of users with different pers take values from a wide range (e.g. from 10−15 to nearly 1). hence, the arithmetic mean, presented in (27), has more tendency toward the higher values of pdr. to overcome this problem, we propose to use the geometric mean instead. thus, the definition in (25) is still valid for f (·), however, we define g(·) as (28) v. numerical results in this section, we present the numerical results. results are the evaluation outcomes of the obtained analytical expressions and are implemented in matlab.

we discuss the results in three main parts. first, we consider the single user case and present our results on comparing oneound and two round schemes for various trt and td values. second, we focus on the one round schemes for the singleser case with large rtts. finally, we consider broadcasting to multiple users and provide the results for the one round schemes with large rtts. in the second and third parts, we compare our results with other schemes, namely round robin (rr) , lt codes and idealistic srlnc (isrlnc) schemes. to show the merit of the proposed nc schemes, rr is chosen as a sample of traditional scheduling techniques and lt coding as a widely used fountain code, both without the need of feedback. furthermore, as our benchmark for optimum achievable performance of the proposed srlnc scheme, we have considered isrlnc, where immediate knowledge about the reception status of the users in the previous transmission is assumed to be available at the sender before the next transmission. this is the best performance that can be achieved by the proposed srlnc scheme. these comparison schemes are described next in more detail.

a. comparison schemes

1) round robin (rr):

the sender transmits each block of m data packets exactly k > 0 times, i.e. the total number of transmissions is ns = km . then, it moves to the next block and repeats the same process. for this transmission scheme to be feasible, we consider the system constraint on the delivery deadline. therefore, ttot = nstpu + trt 2 ≤ td should be satisfied, where tpu = lu is the transmission time of an uncoded packet. in the rr scheme,

similar to one round rlnc and srlnc schemes, this scheme uses no feedback. therefore, rr scheme will be simiar for both single user and multi user cases. the formulations of the performance metrics for this scheme are provided in appendix b.

2) lt coding scheme: in the lt coding scheme, for each block of m packets, the sender uses robust soliton distribuion and transmits ns lt coded packets . two parameters are involved in this scheme, a constant c and a bound on failure probability δ. we set constant c = 0.01 as in , and in line with our one round rlnc analysis in section iii a, we use δ as pf , i.e. the probability of failure state {f }. then, similar to the one round rlnc, the mean throughput and pdr can be computed. it is worthy to mention that we consider the length of an lt coded packet to be lu, hence the same constraint on delivery deadline specified in previous subsection holds here as well. moreover, the intermediate performance of lt codes (i.e. decoding with less than m coded packets) is ignored.

3) idealistic srlnc (isrlnc): in the isrlnc scheme, as shown in figs. 1(c) and 1(f), we consider that immediate knowledge about the rdof of all users is available at the sender after each transmission. also, to obtain the absolute best achievable performance, the effect of field size q is ignored and it is assumed that any m coded packets are sufcient to decode the whole block of m packets. furthermore, r the existence of immediate knowledge in this scheme makes it different to the proposed one round rlnc, srlnc, as well as rr and lt schemes. in those schemes, exactly ns transmissions were carried out before moving to the next block, whereas in isrlnc, it is possible that the sender moves to the next block before completing exactly ns transmissions. in fact, the sender transmits m uncoded packets and ns − m coded packets for a block of m data packets, unless all users get m dof earlier. similar to rlnc and srlnc schemes, a feasible isrlnc scheme should satisfy ns ≥ m and nstpu + trt

remark 4: it should be noted that if an srlnc scheme with immediate and frequent feedback (non interfering, i.e. over full duplex channel) was considered, still it could not offer an improved performance over this isrlnc scheme, as in that case the sender would receive the information about success or failure of each packet trt time after its transmis sion. however, this information is assumed to be available immediately in isrlnc scheme. hence, the following order of performances (starting from the best) is expected: isrlnc, srlnc with immediate and frequent feedback, and feedbackree srlnc.

details on the formulations of e{η} and pd for this scheme

throughout this section, we set the transmission rate of the sender r = 5 mbps, the number of information bits in a packet n = 10000, the number of bits in a feedback nf b = 100 and the number of header bits h = 80. moreover, the rtt, delivery deadline, number of packets and field size are set to trt = 250 ms, td = 450 ms, m = 10 and q = 210, respectively, unless stated otherwise. other parameters will be specified when required.

c. one round schemes versus two round schemesingleser case

in this section, we compare the performance of the proposed one round and two round schemes for the single user case. we consider the packet and feedback erasure probabilities to be pe = 0.1 and pef b = 0. moreover, we assume three rtt values of 10, 50 and 250 ms, and compare the proposed schemes for various values of deadline td. for each set of {trt, td}, all the pareto optimal points for the one round schemes, and 360 pareto optimal points for the two round schemes (by solving (21) for 360 different values of λ. refer to appendix a for more details) are obtained. the results are shown in fig. 3. the main observations can be summarized as follows:

by comparing figs. 3(a) with 3(b) and also figs. 3(c) with 3(d), we see that increasing td allows larger number of transmissions, and as a result lower pdrs could be achieved. for trt = 10 ms, the value of td = td2 = 56 ms in fig. 3(a) is the minimum possible deadline that the twoound scheme can meet (in the worst case scenario). as the results suggest, based on the required pdr or e{η}, either of the oner two round schemes could outperform the other one. by considering larger deadlines td as in fig. 3(b), two round schemes are almost always superior to the one round schemes.

for trt = 50 ms, except for very small required pdr in fig. 3(d), one round schemes work better than the twoound counterparts.

in fig. 3(e), for trt = 250 ms, it can be seen that even for the relatively large delivery deadline of td = 450 ms, still one round schemes have superior performances over two round schemes.

in figs. 3(c) and 3(e), we chose td in a way that the total allowed number of transmissions in the two round schemes will be equal to those in figs. 3(b) and 3(d), respectively. the observed outcome is that the minimum achievable pdr in figs. 3(b) and 3(c), and also in figs. 3(d) and 3(e) are equal for the two round schemes. • in all cases, we observed that the srlnc schemes are always superior to their rlnc counterparts.

note that for the results presented in fig. 3, we have considered m , q, r, pe, pef b , n and h to be fixed. therefore, we cannot indicate which of the one round or the two round schemes results in a better performance in general. however, under the considered parameters, we can give a rule of thumb if trt ≤ m tp and td allows around 2m ∼ 3m that transmissions in the two round schemes, then they work better than the one round ones. however, when trt is relatively large compared to m tp , then the one round schemes will outperform the two round ones, especially for practical values of pdr, ranging from 10−3 to 10−6. for instance, in fig. 3(e), with trt = 250 ms and tp = 2 ms, to deliver m = 10 data packets, the one round schemes can blindly send 125 more coded packets than the two round ones, which clarifies why they result in far better performances.

d. one round rlnc and srlnc schemesingle user case

in this section, we provide further results on the perormance of the proposed one round transmission schemes described in sections iii a and iii b, and compare them with the performance of rr, lt and isrlnc schemes described in section v a and appendices b and c. using the parameters specified in section v b, fig. 4 depicts the mean throughput versus pdr for srlnc and rlnc schemes by showing all the feasible points in the objective space. furthermore, fig. 5 illustrates the mean throughput and the pdr versus ns for srlnc, rr, lt and isrlnc schemes. our observations are as follows:

similar to fig. 3, fig. 4 reveals that srlnc scheme proides a better performance compared to rlnc scheme. thus, in the rest of this section, we will mainly focus on the srlnc scheme. fig. 3. mean throughput versus pdr for the onend two round rlnc and srlnc schemes. each point corresponds to a set of design parameter(s), {ns} for the one round and {nj, ns} for the two round schemes.

fig. 4. mean throughput versus pdr for rlnc and srlnc schemes for four different values of per.

rr performances decrease steadily, and that of isrlnc remains constant. in fact, because of the small per, ns = 10 is enough for delivering and decoding of all m = 10 data packets in srlnc, rr and isrlnc with high probability, and increasing the value of ns has no advantage in terms of the mean throughput. however for lt codes, although ns = 10 is enough for delivering m = 10 lt coded packets, decoding with m lt coded packets is not always possible, hence increasing ns improves the throughput performance with a peak at ns = 13. for pe = 0.3, in an initial phase until a peak is reached, the mean throughput increases for all schemes. after that, further increase of ns leads to a similar result as for cases with pe = 0.01. ! ) s p b m

one round srlnc one round rlnc two round srlnc two round rlnc

results in figs. 4 and 5 also show the trade off between e{η} and pd for users with different pers. joint interretation of the results in figs. 5(a) and 5(b) reveals the impact of ns on the performance of users with different pers. this will be discussed in more detail in the next subsections.

e. one round srlnc schemeulti user case

in this section, we discuss the broadcasting of a block of m = 10 data packets to n users employing srlnc scheme with fixed field size q = 210, through the scenarios described in section iv a. we assume four different classes of users, where each class has one of the fixed per values of pe = [0.01, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5]. we further consider that the ratios of the number of users belonging to these four values of per (i.e. four classes) divided by the total number of users are equal to ¯n = [0.3, 0.4, 0.2, 0.1], respectively. it is worth noting that knowing ¯n is in fact enough for the calculation of f (·) and (a) mean throughput and (b) pdr versus ns for two different values of per.

g(·) in all the considered scenarios for the srlnc scheme, and also rr and lt scheme, as the performance metrics for each user are independent of n . however for the isrlnc scheme, as shown in the appendix c, n is involved in the calculations of performance metrics of each user. thus in section v g, when comparing the results with the isrlnc scheme, n needs to be specified too.

to solve (22), a threshold on g(·) is required. we choose two values of 10−3 and 10−6 for the threshold pth and find the optimum values of ns that maximize f (·) in any of the four scenarios. in scenario i, the user of interest is considered to be among the users in the class with pe = 0.01.

the results are presented in table ii, where in addition to the optimum values of ns, the mean e{η} (denoted by e{η} and obtained by (25)) and mean pdr (denoted by pd and obtained by (27) and (28)) are also shown. comparing the results of these scenarios and using figs. 5(a) and 5(b), we can conclude that scenarios i and ii are in fact two extreme cases, as the performances in scenario i are mostly in the favor of users with low per and those in scenario ii are mostly in the favor of users with high pers. for instance, in scenario i with pth = 10−6, ns = 14 will maximize e{η} for the user of interest (and thus for all users with pe = 0.01). however, this will sacrifice the e{η} of users with high pers (e.g. pe = 0.3 and pe = 0.5), and the pdr of other users are higher than pth = 10−6. on the other hand, choosing ns = 37 in scenario ii will guarantee the pdr to be smaller than 10−3 for all users, but this is achieved with very large margin for users with small values of per. in fact, this is not desirable for these users as their throughputs are sacrificed.

considering the results for scenarios iii and iv, it can be seen that we have moved from the extreme cases to more intermediate cases. in scenario iii, where we have employed the arithmetic mean of the performance metrics, it can be seen that still the performances of the users with higher pers limit the performances of other users. this is due to the fact that their pdrs are at least 102 times higher than those of other users (for ns = 32), and therefore they have the dominant effect on the arithmetic mean. this effect has become less dominant in scenario iv by using the geometric mean of the pdr. r d p 10−6

throughput and pdr. this trade off is not only between the two performance metrics of one user, but also among the performance metrics of all users. hence, the choice of the operating point (i.e. ns, here) affects the performance of each user as well as the overall performance of the system.

f. one round srlnc schemeroadcasting with variable m and q

so far in this paper, we have considered the number of packets in a block m and the field size q, to be fixed. however, in this section, we also take into account the effect of m and q on the optimization of the performance metrics, mean throughput and pdr. considering variable m and q, the packet length l will also be variable, and as a result, the value of per will vary depending on the number of bits in a packet. in order to form a unified framework for the comparison of different schemes against different values of m and q, similar to , we consider a fixed bit error rate (ber), denoted by pebit , and calculate the per for every m and q by using pe = 1 − (1 − pebit )l. here, we consider four different classes of users with bers of pebit = [10−6, 10−5, 5 × 10−5, 10−4], and assume that the normalized number of users having these bers are ¯n = [0.3, 0.4, 0.2, 0.1], respectively.

we focus only on the last two scenarios in section iv a, where the goal was to maximize the mean e{η} with a contraint on the arithmetic or geometric mean of pdr. we repeat the process in the previous subsection for different values of m and q and find the optimum transmission scheme among all feasible transmission schemes. the results are presented in table iii. our first observation is the trade off between the mean throughput and pdr. for instance, providing a lower arithmetic or geometric mean pdr of pth = 10−6 leads to a smaller mean e{η} compared to the case with pth = 10−3. it is also observed that there exists a direct relation between m and the mean throughput values. however, m cannot be chosen arbitrarily large as satisfying the required qos as well as the delivery deadline limit its value.

the final observation is the effect of field size q, which is also highlighted in fig. 6. it can be seen that increasing the field size does not necessarily lead to a better performance. in fact, the widely used assumption of "sufficiently large q" for increasing the probability of having linearly independent rlnc packets, not only imposes extra computational load table ii optimum value of ns, along with the arithmetic mean of users' e{η} and pd for broadcasting scenarios. in scenario iv, the geometric means are also provided in parentheses.

table iii optimum srlnc design parameters, and the arithmetic mean of users' e{η} and pd for broadcasting scenarios iii and iv. in scenario iv, the geometric means are also provided in parentheses.

on the users for decoding the packets, but also results in extra overhead for sending the coding coefficients. this extra overhead degrades the mean throughput performance. hence, instead of choosing very large values for q, a more beneficial approach is to include the effect of field size on decoding probability and overhead in the optimization of nc design parameters. this can potentially lead to selecting values of q that not only give better performances over larger q, but also are more practical.

g. comparing one round schemesroadcasting with varible m and q

in this subsection, we compare the broadcasting perforance of srlnc scheme with isrlnc, rr and lt schemes. we consider the same scenarios and parameters as in the previous subsection and provide the results for pth = 10−3. we set the number of users to be n = 10. the results showing e{η} and pdr for users with different bers are depicted in fig. 7.

the first observation is that the performance of the srlnc is very close to that of the isrlnc scheme for both scenarios iii and iv. it is interesting that optimization of the design parameters of a feedback free scheme results in performances close to those of an idealistic scheme with immediate and the final observation is the difference between the perforances in scenarios iii and iv. it can be seen that in scenario iii, all users with different bers achieve an almost similar mean throughput e{η} with a reasonably low pdr, whereas in scenario iv, the users with lower bers are serviced with much better throughputs and pdrs compared to those with higher bers. this is the trade off caused by the type of required qos and is decided based on the application. fig. 7. comparison of the performance metrics for broadcasting scenarios. for scenarios iii and iv, the obtained design parameters are {m, ns} = {14, 154} and {m, ns} = {53, 159} for the rr scheme, {m, ns} = {42, 158} and {m, ns} = {123, 160} for the lt scheme, and {m, ns} = {52, 161} and {m, ns} = {151, 161} for the isrlnc scheme, respectively. the design variables for srlnc scheme were presented in table iii.

delivery deadline requirements was studied. we employed rlnc and targeted satellite systems with tdd erasure chanels and non negligible rtts. here, we proposed a general framework to analytically study the mean throughout and pdr of users, as well as their interactions under various system parameters and settings. below we briefly discuss the important messages and findings.

firstly, using the proposed framework, the impact of feedack on the performance of the nc systems was studied in two stages. first, we compared the one round (feedback free) and two round (with one feedback) schemes under different rtts and delivery deadline requirements and observed that for single user systems with large rtts, the feedback free nc schemes provide better performances, in terms of the mean throughput and pdr. second, for broadcasting to multiple users, we compared our feedback free one round srlnc scheme with an idealistic srlnc scheme, where immediate and complete knowledge about the users' rdof is available at the sender, and showed that by optimizing the nc design paameters (i.e. the number of packets per block, the number of transmissions for each block and the field size), performances very close to those of the idealistic scheme can be achieved, even without using feedback.

secondly, for multi user broadcast case, we investigated multiple scenarios, corresponding to different qos requireents, and obtained the optimum srlnc based transmission strategies. the results shed light on trade offs between perforances of different users, affected by the required qos types and nc design parameters. one important observation was that to design a broadcast system, performances of some of the users should be sacrificed. for example, it was possible to provide an average performance for all users at the cost of sacrificing the performance of users with good channel conditions. as an alternative, a very good performance could be provided to users with good channel conditions, but at the cost of bringing down the performances of other users coniderably below the average. another important observation was that in contrast to conventional wisdom, choosing higher field size q will not necessarily lead to better performance, hence it is beneficial to include its effect on overhead and decoding probabilities when optimizing system parameters. it r d p 0.6

users with ber=10−6

sce. iii, rr sce. iii, lt

sce. iv, rr sce. iv, lt

was also observed that srlnc scheme outperforms lt and rr schemes.

lastly, it is noteworthy that although the focus of this paper was mostly on tdd channels with large rtts, the proposed general framework can be used to quantify the performance of any similar system with arbitrary parameter sets, investigating which of the oner two round schemes works better. this is one of our contributions that no a priori assumption on the use of feedback is enforced for nc system design. moreover, although we considered only up to one round of feedback, extending the proposed approaches to analytically obtain the exact expressions for schemes with more than one round of feedback is also possible for the single user case, but can be challenging for multi user broadcasting. in the literature, broadcast solutions are given by either heuristics , exaustive search methods like brute force analysis , or simulations , , but here we were able to obtain closedorm expressions for feedback free schemes and evaluate them in the broadcast scenario.

appendix a pareto optimal solutions

this appendix provides details on solving the optimization problem in (21), where e{η} and pd are given in (13) and (14). having a closer look at these two equations, we can rewrite them in the following forms:

(a.2) where we have assumed a constant λ and feasible sets of {n1, ..., nm , ns}.

the solution to the above problem can be obtained by m two dimensional searches over values of ns and nj. to compare the required computations of exhaustive and weighted sum methods for the two round rlnc, we consider each design variable to take on average k different values depending on td and trt. in the exhaustive method, e{η} and pd should be calculated for km+1 feasible solutions to obtain the pareto optimal points. however, in the weighted sum method described here, m k2 calculations of e{η} and pd are required to obtain one pareto optimal point. therefore, in order to have v pareto optimal points, then vm k2 calcuations of e{η} and pd are required. it can be observed that the required computational complexity of the weighted sum method is much lower compared to the exhaustive method for the practical values of v, m and k.

it is worth noting that in order to obtain pareto optimal points that are well distributed in the objective space, we chose λ to be of the form 10θ, where θ is chosen uniformly from interval (−18, 0] with step size of 0.05, which results in 360 different λ values, i.e. 100, 10−0.05, ..., 10−17.95. hence, enough pareto optimal points for accurate analysis and repreentation of throughput pdr trade off will be obtained.

for the srlnc scheme, we will follow a similar approach. we use the exhaustive approach for the one round scheme and the weighted sum method for the two round scheme. for the weighted sum method in (a.3), the functions a0(·), aj(·) and bj(·) can be obtained by using (15) and (16), and rewriting (17) and (18) in the forms of (a.1) and (a.2).

appendix b performance metrics for the round robin (rr) scheme

as explained before, in the rr scheme, all packets in the block are transmitted k times. hence, the probability that a user successfully receives a packet after k transmissions can be calculated as

then, the probability of receiving m out of m packets, after sending the block for k times will be (cid:5)

in fact, this is the probability that the throughput takes the value of e{η} = pm|kηm|k

appendix c performance metrics for the idealistic srlnc (isrlnc) scheme

in this appendix, we obtain the performance metrics of the isrlnc scheme for each user for various values of ns. we start with ns > m and later will also provide the formulation for ns = m .

as explained before, based on the immediate knowledge about users' rdof at the sender, if all users receive m dof after exactly j transmissions (m ≤ j < ns), the sender stops the transmission. otherwise, the transmission continues until the maximum number of transmissions ns is reached. in the first case, we denote the success sub states by {s, j} and write their probabilities as (cid:4) (cid:5)

where the first and second terms in the right hand side of this equation show the probabilities that all users receive m dof within j and j − 1 transmissions, respectively. for j = m , the second term should be set to zero. we note that these sub states and probabilities are common among all users.

in the second case, possible states for each user i after ns transmissions are success sub state {s, ns, i} and failure subtates {f, ns, i|m}, where m < m is the number of uncoded packets received in the systematic phase of transmission. the probabilities for these states can be obtained as (cid:4) (cid:5)

psysi (m, m)pf,ns,i|m

where (c.2) is given for cases in which the number of coded transmissions, i.e. ns −m , is larger than or equal to the rdof after the systematic phase, i.e. m −m. it can be easily inferred that for cases where ns − m < m − m, this probability will be always equal to 1. in (c.3), psysi (m, m), similar to (2), is the probability that the i th user receives m out of m uncoded packets in the systematic phase of transmission. hence, the last term in the right hand side of (c.3) shows the total probability that user i receives lower than m dof after ns transmissions. the corresponding throughput values can thus be expressed as (c.3)