abstract—multibeam satellite systems (mss) enable transmision flexibility and spatial diversity while efficiently reusing the scarce spectrum resource. however, as spectrum reuses tend to introduce co channel interference, mss need to address power alocation and interference management carefully. in this paper, we tackle the joint interference pricing and power allocation problems of mss by formulating the underlying resource allocation problem as a dynamic game model—the stackelberg model. in our proposed scheme, a fresh satellite user will be charged according to its inerference on the satellite system. mss can dynamically adjust the interference price in order to make a tradeoff between intercell interference and operating profit. meanwhile, for the satellite user, an equilibrium power allocation should be ascertained in response to the mss's pricing. a novel market based solution is proposed for interference management in mss by introducing an elastic price mechanism. the nash equilibrium for interference pricing and its iterative convergence for power allocation have further been proven. numerical results are provided to evaluate the impact of different prices on the utility functions of both mss and satellite users.

index terms—multibeam satellite systems (mss), satellite

communications, power allocation, interference management.

w ith the wide applications of various satellite systems,

higher demand for bandwidth efficiency and transmision capacity are expected to be fulfilled. multibeam antenna

manuscript received january 6, 2017; revised june 12, 2017 and august 25, 2017; accepted october 23, 2017. date of publication november 10, 2017; date of current version march 15, 2018. this work was supported by the national natural science foundation of china under grants 61401194 and 61601221. the review of this paper was coordinated by dr. giovanni g. g. giambene. (corresponding author: feng li).

f. li is with the college of information engineering, zhejiang university of technology, hangzhou 310023, china, and also with the school of comuter science and engineering, nanyang technological university, singapore 639798 (e mail: fengli2002@yeah.net).

l. wang is with the college of information engineering, zhejiang university

k. y. lam is with the school of computer science and engineering, nanyang technological university, singapore 639798 (e mail: kwokyan. lam@ntu.edu.sg).

x. liu is with the school of information and communication engineerng, dalian university of technology, dalian 116024, china (e mail: liuxintar1984@dlut.edu.cn).

j. wang and k. zhao are with the school of electronic science and engineerng, nanjing university, nanjing 210093, china (e mail: wangjnju@nju.edu.cn; zhaokanglian@nju.edu.cn).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online , member, ieee,

, member, ieee, and li wang

technology, which can help enhancing frequency reuse and inreasing communication capacity, is a significant part of satellite communication systems that has attracted growing attention of the satellite communication community .

the most obvious characteristics of multibeam technique is its capability of transferring a single wide beam into dozens, or even hundreds, of beams so as to increase the coverage gain for satellite antennae. with the application of multiple antennae, multibeam technique can allocate the same spectrum resource to serve more users, i.e., allowing it to carry larger capacity withut increase in bandwidth. with the continuous development and application of multibeam technique, it will be equipped by more satellite mobile communication systems especially on ka band. however, in the face of spatial diversity as well as band reuse of multibeam satellite systems (mss), interference among beams will affect system performance to a large extend , . besides, since it is difficult for satellite systems to keep perfect orthogonality during frequency reuse, inter cell interfernce seems inevitable especially for adjacent cells .

in general, each spot beam in mss has different traffic deand as well as channel condition depending on the service requirement and location of the users , . meanwhile, each beam intends to compete with others for wireless resources such as bandwidth and power to achieve satisfactory communication. thus, in order to manage the issue of inter cell interference and to enhance mss performance, various techniques are explored by researchers with the objective of achieving efficient wireless resource allocation.

unlike static resource allocation in satellite system, dynamic allocation needs to take into account a number of deciding factors including individual communication requirement, user priority, transmit diversity as well as service type in real time. mainly working in time division mode (tdm) with elastic netork schemes, existing satellite systems manage their wireless resources by rationally allocating time slot, transmit power as well as spectrum band to address these concerns. different tdm slots of the same carrier can transmit information in various rates while depending on accurate synchronization technology to guarantee its practicability . the allocation of time slot resource takes an important position in mf tdma systems due to its major impact on the resource efficiency and user's qos . for another, resource constraints in transmission power of satellite systems have become a serious obstacle for the networking of satellite communications, air space ground interation and high speed capacity. the optimization objective of power control in mss needs to match the differential demands of traffic, rate or throughput for different beams . various efforts in the literature to improve both energy efficiency and spectrum efficiency have been paid , . besides, as the allocated capacity of each beam should be changed adaptively according to the time variant traffic distribution over mss, more bandwidths can be focused on cells with hot traffic , . dynamic spectrum combined with power allocation can make mss more feasible in complex network circumstance. the allocation of spectrum band in satellite furthermore, systems is always performed by ways of spectrum sharing or dynamic spectrum access where cognitive satellite communiations sharing satellite spectrum with terrestrial networks have attracted plenty of attention in recent years , .

compared to the study of resource allocation on terrestrial networks, works on satellite systems, especially on mss, have not been investigated well. as resource allocation in wireless networks always needs to balance the benefits of different paricipants, the effort tends to be deemed like a zero sum game, though market driven mechanism consisted of auction based or pricing based approach has long been studied in terrestrial netorks. it is widely accepted that market based method can more efficiently redeploy the scarce resource, balance the demands and even attract potential participants. however, to our knowldge, few related work is available for the satellite systems. only several pricing based methods for resource allocation in satellite communication networks have been proposed before , . in , a congestion pricing scheme is designed to drive the buffer queue length to an appropriate reference queue length. in , a novel mac protocol is proposed based on some pricing strategy that aims to allocate network resources efficiently according to users' demand.

in this paper, we investigate the problem of interference mangement in mss by introducing a concept namely interference pricing. compared with single beam satellite, in order to enance spectrum efficiency, mss easily incurs co channel intererence thus resulting in deterioration in system capacity. in the proposed scenario, when a new terrestrial satellite user joins in the mss network, it can be foreseen that adjacent cells sharing the same band will suffer additional interference accordingly. with the intention of properly controlling inter cell interfernce, we try to apply market based solution to adjust new user's power and manage inter cell interference. when new satellite users access the multibeam network with larger transmit power, they should bear relatively higher cost. the satellite system can achieve higher revenue and better control of inter cell interfernce through this pricing scheme, which raises the charge to adaptive level when inter cell interference is too high. to be specific, we adopt stackelberg game model to formulate the pricing problem in this paper. the stackelberg game, which is a strategic game consisting of a leader and several followers cometing with one another on certain resources, has been widely investigated and applied in terrestrial networks to solve dyamic game difficulties . in particular, proposed a negotiation based throughput maximization algorithm which adjusts the operating channel and transmit power among access points from a game theoretic perspective. investigated a price based resource allocation strategy for two tier femtocell networks where a central macrocell is underlaid with distributed femtocells over same band. proposed a novel cell on/off scheduling algorithm based on the stackelberg game to optiize packet throughput performance with a tradeoff in energy consumption. designed a joint pricing and power allocaion scheme for cognitive radio networks by using stackelberg game.

for mss, due to the provision of spectrum reuse in its dozens of cells, when a new satellite user joins the mss, there will be an increase in interference in the system, especially between adjacent cells sharing the same frequency band. we find that the economic perspective method can well model the inherent relationship between managing mss inter cell interference and allocating user's power resource. to the best of our knowledge, no prior literature addresses the issue of interference manageent in mss by using market driven solution. the special fadng model of the satellite channel and the oblique projection in mss should be paid more attention to.

the contributions of this paper can be highlighted as follows. 1) a novel resource allocation algorithm is proposed to adress the interference management in mss by introducng a market based mechanism which plays an effective role to combat satellite networks' interference and achieve higher spectrum efficiency.

2) we adopt a dynamic game model—stackelberg model to describe the relationship between the satellite system's profit, interference pricing and user's power allocation. a satellite user can observe the satellite system's pricing and then decides its power allocation in order to maximize cost efficiency.

3) asymptotic analysis on the changes in pricing and player's profit is provided to evaluate the performance of the proosed method. this paper also proves the pure nash equilibrium of the pricing algorithm and its convergence characteristics for the power allocation solution.

the rest of this paper is organized as follows. a system model of mss network is provided in section ii. then, a pricing algoithm based on dynamic game model is proposed in section iii. in section iv, numerical results are provided to testify the perormance of our proposed scheme. we conclude this paper in section v.

ii. system model

a high throughput mss is designed to comprise of n beams to serve a specified area, in which every single section is covred by a different satellite beam. in this paper, we consider a geostationary satellite that employs a transparent architecture operating in the ka band. since the scenario involves flexible power allocation and interference management, it is assumed that the satellite payload is equipped with the necessary modles, such as multiport amplifiers, flexible traveling wave tube amplifiers. in the course of spectrum reuse, we assume that a four color spectrum reuse pattern is employed which is a simle and practical scheme to avoid coverage conflict and improve spectrum efficiency as shown in fig. 1. generally, when investigating the resource allocation and inerference management in multibeam satellite, the earth surface can be considered as a plane, on which each cell is approxmated by an orthographic projection for the satellite beam. thus, a cone has been formed by a cell and the correspondng beam. we should take into account during the design phase of satellite networks that the signal strength in the border of a beam is weaker than that in the center. hence, in this work, we suppose that most of the cells in the proposed system model as shown in fig. 1, are not working under the mode of orthographic projection, but the oblique projection which makes the bottom of the cone similar to an ellipse. moreover, the cell's shape is changing with the angle between the central line and the bottom. in terrestrial communication systems, the strength of interell interference mainly depends on the distance from the adjacent cells of first tier. if the orthogonality between the terestrial cells is perfect, less interference will be invoked by the other cells. however, in mobile satellite communication system, the satellite antenna acts as the role of spatial filter. generally, the angular selectivity of beams is hard to be ideal in practice, and the interference strength is also affected by the angle beween the selected user's position and the central line of the corresponding beam, as shown in fig. 2. as shown in fig. 2, when taking into account the oblique projection, the subastral point does not match the cell's center well. in this case, the angle θ describing the deviation angle between user (u, c) and cell center o can be expressed as

where ds o denotes the distance between cell center o and the satellite as shown in fig. 2. ds u c denotes the distance between user (u, c) and the subastral point, do u c denotes the distance between user (u, c) and cell center o, and r means the earth radius.

in the geo satellite communication system proposed in this paper, we adopt the communication mode of channelized tdm. in general, for channelized tdm systems, a user in any single cell will suffer from interference caused users working in other cells which share the same band. as for the number of interfernce users, it depends on the network pattern and whether the cell is fully loaded. as shown in fig. 1, user (u, c) denotes the user causing interference to user (m, n). then, for the uplink channel, the carrier power can be obtained as

where pm n denotes the transmit power of satellite terminal (m, n), αm n denotes the elevation angle from user (m, n) to the satellite system, gm n (αm n ) denotes the antenna gain of terminal user (m, n) at direction αm n , θm m n is the derivation angle from user (m, n) to the central line of cell m . gm (θm m n ) is the satellite antenna gain of cell m at direction θm m n . dm n is the straight line distance between user (m, n) and the satellite system. λ denotes the wavelength, and fm n (αm n ) denotes the channel fading of user (m, n) at direction αm n .

thus, the interference among the terrestrial cells can be given

where k denotes the number of the cells sharing the same freuency with cell m , pu c denotes the transmit power of satellite terminal (u, c), gu (θu u c ) is the satellite antenna gain of cell u at direction θm u c , du c is the straight line distance between user (u, c) and the satellite system, λ denotes the wavelength, and fu c (αu c ) denotes the channel fading of user (u, c) at direction αu c . μu c denotes the active factor of user (u, c) which is reated to the user's service type. ρm u is the polarization isolation factor between cell m and n . then, the uplink sinr can be expressed as eq. (4) shown at the top of the next page. where n0 is the spectral density of noise power which depends on the receiver antenna and equivalent noise temperature along with climatic conditions over the coverage area as noise temperature is aggravated by rain fading. (1)

(3) iii. dynamic game and nash equilibrium

the power allocation and interference pricing problem over mss can be modeled as a dynamic game, in which each player (satellite system or satellite user) tries to maximize its payoff function. a kind of strategic games known as the stackelberg game which matches our model well is employed in this case. by deriving the nash equilibrium, an algorithm for joint power allocation and interference pricing is proposed and the relevant characteristic analysis is also provided.

the stackelberg game model is a dynamic strategic model where the players involved in the process are categorized into two groups (the leader players and the follower players). the leader moves first and then the follower moves sequentially. therefore, the follower chooses a strategy to optimize its obective function in respond to the leader's action. on the other hand, the leader can also pursue its benefit maximization by predicting the optimal response of the follower.

in this work, we formulate the optimization problem of reource allocation in the process of spectrum reuse in mss as a non cooperative, two stage stackelberg game where the satellite system acts as leader and new satellite users as followers.

stage i: the satellite system tends to receive more profits from its satellite relay service by rationally deciding interfernce price π and scheduling transmit power pn for the original satellite user (m, n) suffered co channel interference from a new user (u, c) as shown in fig. 1. in this scenario, due to the coxistence of time division and frequency division transmission mode, we consider the original satellite user (m, n) who suffers the co channel interference from a new satellite user (u, c). and we will give an analysis on the scenario where the co channel interference is raised by multiple satellite users. thus, in this case, the satellite system's utility function us(pc , π, pn , bc ) can be expressed as follows

where πpc fcs denotes the charge paid by new satelite user c due to its interference on the satellite sysem. pc denotes the transmit power of the new satellite user, fcs denotes the path loss from the satellite transmit user c to the satellite system which can be expressed as fcs = gu c (αu c )gu (θu u c fu c (αu c ). furhermore, xloss is the increasing power consumed by the origial satellite user n when the new satellite user has joined in the system, thus xloss = pn − p(cid:3) n is the power required by the user under no co channel interference, which can be +n0(αm n )bm n (4)

achieved from the equation tain xloss = γ tarp c fc s when qos is merely attained at the given threshold for original user n. in this profit function equation, π, κ and ε denote the monetary coefficient which transfers the system income into monetary profit. besides, bc is the bandidth purchased by the satellite user c. fn s

stage ii: having detected the interference price and power allocation of the satellite system, new satellite user c can select appropriate transmit power pc to maximize its utility function uc (pc , π, pn , bc ), which can be expressed as follows (cid:7) (cid:6)

where ω is the monetary coefficient and log2(·) is the transission capacity obtained by the new satellite user. the exlanations about the parameters ε, π, pn , pc are given before. after paying for the cost of system interference and transmision bandwidth, the new user can achieve the benefit in terms of transmission capacity in given spectrum band.

b. derivation of the nash equilibrium

having detected the interference pricing and power allocation of the satellite system, the nash equilibrium of the satellite user's utility function can be firstly derived. based on the necessary conditions for nash equilibrium and system's decision on power allocation, we have

solving equation (7), we can obtain

combing (8) and the sinr requirement of the satellite system = γtar, the power allocation pn transmission as can be expressed as p n fn s p c fc s +n 0(α n )b n

back to (8), substituting pn by (9), the power allocation for the new satellite user can be achieved as − n0(αc )bc ω π ln 2 · fcs fcs − ω/(π ln 2) − n0(αc )bc + n0(αn )bn fn s(1 + 1/γtar) pc (π) = (9) since the utility function us is concave with the parameter π, taking its derivation, we can obtain the optimal pricing for the interference pricing as

substituting π in (9) and (10), the equilibrium power allocation pc (π∗) and pn (π∗) can be obtained respectively. furthermore, the optimal profit for the satellite system can be achieved by putting π∗ into (11), then we have eq. (13) shown at the bottom of this page.

then, the optimal profit for the new satellite user in this satel , p∗

lite communication can also be obtained by putting π∗, p∗ into (5) which can be expressed as

therefore, a game algorithm for power allocation and interfernce pricing has been proposed to maximize the profit of both the satellite system and satellite user. proposition 1: there exists a nash equilibrium for satellite system's utility, and the equilibrium can be unique when ω π ln 2 > n0(αc )bc + condition (c1): ω /(π ln 2)−n 0(α c )b c +n 0(α n )b n 1+1/γ tar

holds. proof: based on kakutani's fixed point theorem , a equilibrium point, or a fixed point exists, in given response us and variable π, when the following sufficient conditions can be satisfied: (1) in limited euclidean space, u (π) is convex and nonempty with π, and us : σ → σ is a compact convex subset. (cid:2) (2) closed mappings exist for u (π). define si(pn , pc , π) is the strategy combination for u (π), thus σi is a simple in dimension |si − 1|. besides, since u (π) is linear and continuous whose maximal value can be fixed in its compact subset, we can obtain condition (1) should be met. then, condition (2) can be proven by the method of the proof by contradiction. if condition (2) cannot be met, there exist ε > 0 and π(cid:3) i, π−i, ) > u ( (cid:14)πi, π−i) + 3ε. because ui is continuous and (πk , (cid:14)πk ) → (π, (cid:14)π), giving enough large ε, there is i letting ui(π(cid:3)

d. asymptotic behavior analysis

we can achieve from the deductions above that the satellite system's equilibrium profit us and satellite user's equilibrium utility uc as well as the optimal equilibrium price π∗ are all affected by the parameters' selection including ω, κ and γtar. thus, we give the asymptotic analysis for these parameters on the effects of optimal utilities and prices.

remark 1: fixing κ and γtar, when satellite user's moneary coefficient ω → 0, satellite system's optimal price π∗ → 0. on the other hand, original satellite user's optimal power

fig. 3. equilibrium power allocation and pricing with changing monetary coefficients.

pn (π) → n 0(α c +n 0(α n )b n ) pc = n 0(α c −n 0(α n )b n ) . the changes of optimal fc s power allocation and optimal spectrum pricing with various monetary coefficients are shown in fig. 3. in the following simulation tests, we consider a mss network with one centralzed satellite and a number of beams as shown in fig. 1. in this case, satellite users work in the mode of channelized tdm where the interior interference and the interference caused by other satellite networks are ignored. suppose the mss network has 16 beams, and each beam's radius is 200 km. ten satellite users randomly locate in each cell. we consider the interference in each beam to be mainly due to spectrum reuse in the mss network. in this subsection, we investigate the situation where an original satellite user suffers from the co channel interfernce from a new satellite user located in the nearest cell. in the following subsection, we will further give the utility functions fig. 4. equilibrium utility functions with changing monetary coefficients.

for the mss network in which one original satellite user and a group of new satellite users work in the same channel.

s (π) → this n 0(α c −n 0(α n )b n ) c (π) → −εbc ≤ 0. the effects of optimal utility functions are shown in fig. 4. in the tests, we set γtar = 10, κ = 0.4, n0(αc ) = 0.004, n0(αn ) = 0.006, fn s = 0.2, fcs = 0.15, bc = 1, bn = 2 and ω ∈ [0, 30]. we can obtain from fig. 3 that the optimal pricing and power allocation are all decreasing when monetary coefficient ω → 0. we can also achieve similar conclusions as deduced from the above. same change rule appears in fig. 4 where profits for both the satellite system and new satellite user are damaged when monetary coefficient decreases. if the satelite user cannot expect to receive enough benefit from leasing the spectrum of the satellite system, it can be imaged that the user will not be eager to purchase more band for usage hence leads to decline in profit at the end. in fn s (1+1/γ tar) + (ε − n0(αc ))bc − κγ tarp c fc s situation, we can also

, fig. 5. equilibrium utility and price with changing qos threshold.

and p∗ → εbc and c u ∗ → −εbc , thus the benefit received by satellite systems c equals to the cost paid by the satellite user which makes the trading to become a zero sum game.

remark 3: given κ and ω, when γtar → ∞, which means the qos requirement of the satellite users is decreasing, then equilibrium price π∗ → ∞, optimal power allocation p∗ → n → −n 0(α n )b n n 0(α n )b n −n 0(α c )b c . besides, the equilibrium fc s fn s profits for both the satellite system and the satellite user become to be u ∗ → 0. fig. 5 shows the change tendency of s power allocation, equilibrium pricing and utilities with increasng qos threshold. in practice, we can also identify the equilibrium power allocaion p∗ c by iterative algorithm. for generality, we assume both the original satellite user and new satellite user have suffiient power capacity pm ax , then the iterative algorithm can be performed as the following steps. n and p∗

iterative power algorithm (ipa): step 1, initialization: iniialize original satellite power p(0) c = 0; step 2: begin iteration, (i) original satellite user updates its power by pn = min{ p c fc s /γ tar−n 0(α c )b c }, and the new satellite user fn s updates pc = { ω /(π ln 2)−n 0(α c )b c −p n fn s }. repeat (i) and (ii) over again until the algorithm converges. end n = 0 and p(0)

proposition 2: under condition (c1), the ipa can be conergent if γtar ≥ 1. furthermore, the nash equilibrium for power allocation is unique.

proof: to testify the iterative algorithm proposed above conergent, we need to rewrite the algorithm in matrix form. thus, we have

where (cid:22)k(φ) = i − k(φ). σ is the complete set of vector space. τ denotes a specific form of the space mapping which means the thresholds of the new satellite user's power. here, matrix w τ (φ) is a diagonal matrix, bτ (pn , φ) is a (|φ + 1|) × 1 vector. according to , if there is (cid:10) (cid:22)k(φ)(cid:10)∞ ≤ 1, where (cid:10) • (cid:10)∞ is the matrix form of (cid:22)k(φ) in this situation, then the iterative algorithm in (16) will converge to a fixed and unique point. based on the procedure of ipa, we achieve

then, we can obtain that γtar ≥ 1 can make the condition (cid:10) (cid:22)k(φ)(cid:10)∞ ≤ 1 holds which will guarantee the equilibrium unique.

f. single original satellite user and multiple new satellite users

we further consider the satellite network in which one orignal satellite user and a group of new satellite users q = {2, 3, . . . , n + 1} coexist. n is the user number. we also asume that condition (c1) is met for every single user in q. in this case, the original user may refer to the most important user whom the satellite system mainly needs to supply service for. when multiple satellite users access the spectrum band at the same time, the system requires to calculate additional cost and proper power allocation. then, the new stackelberg game model can be expressed as follows.

stage i: the satellite system decides its interference price π, the original satellite user's transmit power pn based on the set q of multiple new satellite users to optimize its profit by stage ii: in response to satellite system's action, each satellite user c ∈ q schedules its power level by solving the following problem

we can obtain that each satellite user involved in the multile users scenario will suffer from interference caused by the original user and other new satellite users. the mathematical deductions of equilibrium price, optimal power allocation as well as iterative convergence are similar to the case of single new user scenario as mentioned above, thus we ignore the reated process. in this case, it can also be proven that there exists a unique nash equilibrium for the extended stackelberg game model.

in this section, we further evaluate the performances of the proposed utility functions and transmission power allocation with changing interference price. as shown in fig. 6, we give the performance of utility functions of the satellite system and new satellite user denoted by us and uc , with increasng interference pricing π. in this test, we fix the relevant parameters as γtar = 10, κ = 0.4, n0(αc ) = 0.004, n0(αn ) = 0.006, fn s = 0.2, fcs = 0.15 and bc = 1, bn = 2. the equaions of utility functions are expressed by (5) and (6). we can obtain from the figure that the utility function of the satellite system is not linear and has a maximum at the point of equilibium pricing. thus, if the interference price is too high, it will hamper consumer demand thus effectively cannot increase the satellite system's profit. a proper interference pricing should be carefully designed to maximize the system's benefit. on the other hand, it is apparent that the benefit of new satellite user will be damaged with increasing interference pricing as the satellite user needs to bear the cost. similar conclusions can also be obained from (5) and (5). besides, as shown in the figure, when the monetary coefficient decreases, benefits for both the satelite system and user are degrading accordingly. high coefficient means more benefit for the game follower with same bandwidth, which will attract satellite users to participate in the dynamic trading in depth. fig. 6. utility functions with increasing interference pricing.

then, we give the performances of equilibrium power allocaion with different interference prices as shown in fig. 7. from the figure, we can obtain that power allocation for both the original and new satellite users are decreasing with upgrading interference pricing. it is easy to understand that the satellite user's transmit power should be restricted since the cost is just accounted for by the interference caused by the user. on the other hand, when the transmit power of the satellite user dereases which will lead to a decrease in inter cell interference as a result, thus the original satellite user does not need a high transmit power to combat outside interference. besides, when fi become low which means the path loss is relatively severe, then a higher power allocation is required for satellite users. as shown in fig. 7, the transmit powers for satellite users increase with degrading fi.

we further testify the optimal pricing π which has been given in (12). from the equation, we can obtain that optimal pricng is affected by several parameters, such as fn , ω, γtar. as shown in fig. 8, we give the performance of optimal pricing with changing ω and fn . first of all, we can achieve from the figure that an increasing optimal pricing is attained when the monetary coefficient ω is growing. it can be concluded that the satellite system can properly enhance its interference pricing when more benefits are expected for the satellite conumer. moreover, when the path loss increases as shown in this figure which means a higher transmit power for the satellite user is essential, thus the satellite system can raise the interfernce price to balance the inter cell interference and improve its profit. fig. 7. equilibrium power allocation with increasing interference pricing.

at last, we give the utility performances for both the satellite system and satellite users under optimal interference pricing as shown in fig. 9. the utility functions have been expressed in (13) and (14). it can be concluded from fig. 8 that a higher optimal utility can be attained with increasing ω and decreasing γtar. in fact, it is a win win cooperation between the satellite system and satellite users. when satellite users can achieve an ideal benefit from the leased spectrum, a higher price is more acceptable. as a result, the profit of the satellite system can also fig. 9. optimal utility of the satellite system and user with changing ω and optimal interference pricing

be improved. from another perspective, if the satellite user is eager to lease the communication band which implies a desired performance is expected for the user, then we can predict that it is an opportunity for the satellite system to reach the deal with an ideal price. a proper pricing will smooth the band trading and benefit the satellite system in the end.

in this paper, we have proposed a novel algorithm of power allocation and interference pricing for mss in which the probem of inter cell interference has been carefully considered in the context of spectrum reuse. we have described the dynamic game issue by using the stackelberg model wherein the satelite system acted as a leader and satellite users as followers. the satellite system intends to increase system profit and balnce inter cell interference. meanwhile, satellite users observe the action of the system and properly allocate their transmit power to maximize their utility function. in mss, the problem of inter cell interference is required to be addressed, and we introduce the concept of market based proposal to control inerference. a complicated resource allocation problem has been properly modeled and solved by fixing the nash equilibrium. numerical results were further provided to evaluate the perormance of our proposed pricing on the system's benefits. in the following research, we will investigate the pricing diversity of different satellite bands in order to present the problem of resource allocation in mss in a more detailed manner. the authors would like to thank the editor and the reviewrs whose constructive comments have helped to improve the presentation of this paper.

j. e. barcelo, m. a. vazquez castro, j. lei, a. hjoungnes, "distributed power and carrier allocation in multibeam satellite uplink with individal sinr constraints," in proc. ieee global telecommun. conf., 2009, pp. 1 6.

j. anzalchi et al., "beam hopping in multi beam broadband satellite sysems: system simulation and performance comparison with non hopped systems," in proc. 5th asms 11th spsc, cagliari, italy, sep. 2010, pp. 248 255.

u. park, h. w. kim, d. s. oh, and b. j. ku, "flexible bandwidth allocation scheme based on traffic demands and channel conditions for multi beam satellite systems," in proc. ieee veh. technol. conf. fall, 2012, pp. 1 5. j. lei and m. a. v. castro, "joint power and carrier allocation for the multibeam satellite downlink with individual sinr constraints," in proc. ieee int. conf. commun., 2010, pp. 1 5.

t. qi and y. wang, "energy efficient power allocation over multibeam satellite downlinks with imperfect csi," in proc. int. conf. wireless comun. signal process., 2015, pp. 1 5.

x. kan and x. xu, "energynd spectral efficient power allocation in multibeam satellite system with co channel interference," in proc. int. conf. wireless commun. signal process., 2015, pp. 1 6.

a. fiachetti, m. fiachetti, a. pietrabissa, and m. petrone, "congestion pricing for dynamic bandwidth allocation in satellite networks: a gameheoretic approach," in proc. ieee 1st aess eur. conf. satellite telecomun., 2012, pp. 1 5.

j. sun and e. modiano, "channel allocation using pricing in satellite

a. m. colell, m. d. whinston, and j. r. green.,microeconomic theory.

feng li received the b.s. and the m.s. degrees from the harbin university of science and techology, harbin, china, in 2001 and 2005, respecively. he also received the ph.d. degree from the harbin institute of technology, harbin, china, in 2013. he is currently working at the college of inormation engineering, zhejiang university of techology, hangzhou, china. he is also at the school of computer science and engineering, nanyang techological university, as a research fellow recently.

from 2005 to 2009, he was with the qiaohang communication company, harbin, china, where he worked on the research and development of the digital trunking system. his research interests include cognitive radio networks, sensor networks, and satellite systems.

kwok yan lam received the b.sc. (first class hons). degree from the university of london, london, u.k., in 1987 and the ph.d. degree from the university of cambridge, cambridge, u.k., in 1990. he is a renowned cyber security researcher and practitioner. he is currently a full professor at the school of computer science and engineering, nanyang technological university. he has collabrated extensively with law enforcement agencies, government regulators, telecommunication operators and financial institutions in various aspects of infoomm and cyber security in the region. he has been a professor of the tsinghua university, pr china (2002 2010) and a faculty member of the national uniersity of singapore and the university of london since 1990. he was a visiting scientist at the isaac newton institute of the cambridge university and a visting professor at the european institute for systems security. in 1998, mr. lam received the singapore foundation award from the japanese chamber of commerce and industry in recognition of his r&d achievement in information security in singapore.

xin liu received the b.s. and the m.s. degrees from the harbin institute of technolog, harbin, china, in 2006 and 2008, respectively. he also received the ph.d. degree from the harbin institute of technology, harbin, china, in 2012. he is currently an associate professor at dalian university of technology, dalian, china. his research interests include cognitive radio networks, iot, and satellite communication networks.