robert t. schwarz , member, ieee, thomas delamotte, member, ieee, kai uwe storek, member, ieee, and andreas knopp, senior member, ieee

abstract—high throughput satellites employing multibeam antennas and full frequency reuse for broadband satellite serices are considered in this paper. such architectures offer, for example, a cost effective solution to optimize data delivery and extend the coverage areas in future 5g networks. we propose the application of the multiple input multiple output (mimo) techology in both the feeder link and the multiuser downlink. spatial multiplexing of different data streams is performed in a comon feeder beam. in the user links, mimo with multiple beams is exploited to simultaneously serve different users in the same frequency channel. under particular design constraints, effective spatial separation of the multiple user signals is possible. to mitgate the inter stream interference in the mimo feeder link as well as the multiuser downlink, precoding of the transmit signals is applied. simulation results illustrate the performance gains in terms of sum throughput.

index terms—mimo, satellite communication, channel capacty, multiuser channels, radiowave propagation, 5g, precoding, user scheduling, non terrestrial networks, backhauling, access networks.

b roadcasting of video content to home users has

been the key application scenario of geostationary satelite systems for many decades. meanwhile, the advent of 5g networks and the introduction of integrated satelliteerrestrial architectures will considerably change the role of satellite communications in the near future. traffic offloadng to the network edges, backhauling or direct broadband access (e.g., video on demand) to remote areas belong to the most promising use cases of satellite communications (satcom) . other use cases include the delivery of broadband data to satellite earth stations on mobile platorms (esomps) like trains, cruise ships and airplanes. the cost per bit is in this context a key enabler. the sustainng demand for higher data rates in next generation networks has already motivated the development of high throughput satellites (htss).

to meet the target data rates of future hts systems and the economies of scale in terms of costs per bit as required by

manuscript received may 30, 2018; revised august 8, 2018, october 18, 2018, and december 3, 2018; accepted december 17, 2018. this work was supported in part by the german aerospace center space administration (dlr) and in part by the german federal ministry for economic affairs and energy (bmwi) under grant 50yb1618. (corresponding author: robert t. schwarz.)

the authors are with the chair of signal processing, bundeswehr university

munich, 85579 neubiberg, germany (e mail: papers.sp@unibw.de).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available 5g applications and networks, the trend has been to increase the number of beams to provide higher power flux density per beam and increase the reuse factors for the spectrum. in contrast to a four color frequency reuse (fr4) scheme, where orthogonality between the adjacent beams is ensured using disjoint frequencies and polarizations, the full frequency reuse (ffr) of the spectrum has recently been considered . however, ffr leads to significant inter beam interference, also called co channel interference (cci), and moves the powerimited link budget to an interference limited regime. users located at the edges of the beams suffer from the most severe cci and experience a strong degradation of their achievable carrier to interference plus noise power ratio (cinr).

one strategy to significantly reduce the cci is the precoding linf the transmit signals in the gateways. in general, ear and nonlinear precoding techniques can be considered. while nonlinear precoders are hard to implement in practical systems, thus serving only as a theoretical upper limit in many studies, linear precoding techniques often achieve similar perormances like their nonlinear counterparts . remarkable throughput improvements compared to the widespread fr4 scheme can be achieved with linear precoding strategies like for example zero forcing (zf) . recent research activities in and have a special focus on precoding for multicast communication to exploit potential throughput gains offered by the dvb s2x superframes .

to support the huge amount of aggregated user traffic, the shift of the feeder links to the q/v band offering unexplored spectrum of up to 5 ghz in bandwidth has recently been considered . nevertheless, several gateways are still necessary . the gateways have to be displaced geographically to allow the reuse of the feeder link bandwidth. moreover, transmit diversity techniques are needed to cope with the heavy rain fades in these frequency bands . different solutions can be found in and the references therein. all solutions are based on a certain amount of redundancy in the feeder links, either through additional gateways in standby that become active if one gateway is in outage, or through spare capacity which is reserved at the active gateways. for traffic re routing, a terrestrial network to interconnect the gateways is presumed in all cases, which is already common practice in current systems. relying on the existing gateway infrastructures as well as resorting to the ffr strategy in the user beams, we proose the application of spatial multiple input multiple output (mimo) techniques to tackle the uplink and downlink bandidth limitations and to reduce the per bit delivery costs. mimo systems are well known for their bandwidth effiiency through the simultaneous transmission of multiple data streams in the same frequency band. this is among the most important performance indicators to compete with terrestrial gigabit networks. under favorable channel conditions, the spaial interference is eliminated in the channel, and a linear increase of the channel capacity with the number of transmit or receive antennas, whatever number is smaller, is achieved. in mimo channels with predominant line of sight (los) wave propagation, particular antenna array geometries are required to obtain such favorable channel conditions. the optimal antenna array geometry for maximum capacity los mimo satellite channels has been analytically derived in and was verified through satellite channel measurements reported in . based on these fundamentals, very recent research has now started to propose first practical applications of mimo to satcom . here, the distribution of video onemand (vod) services as an example of edge content delivery to home users in future 5g satellite networks is addressed . however, the results can also be further extended to other fixed satellite service (fss) applications like the esomps.

in this paper we consider the forward link of a hts system. in particular, we propose a mimo feeder uplink with two gateway antennas and a multiuser mimo (mu mimo) downlink to noncooperative users with a single antenna each. the satellite payload relies on a bent pipe architecture [19, p. 437, ch. 9.2] in order to keep the complexity at satelite level low. the content delivery to the users is achieved through spatial multiplexing of the different data streams.

the use of spatial mimo in the uplink and in the downink is a completely different approach compared to satellite network architectures that have been proposed so far. in state of the art feeder links, the deployment of antennas seprated by several tens of kilometers is only done to achieve diversity gains within the footprint of a given feeder beam. both antennas are never active at the same time, which is not a cost efficient solution due to the unused redunant hardware. with mimo feeder links, the antennas are operated simultaneously, which doubles the maximum transit power per link and enables spatial multiplexing. the opportunities of mimo feeder links have been discussed by delamotte and knopp .

in the mu mimo downlink, the exploitation of the los channel phase information allows to build groups of users with limited cci. these users are spread over an area covred by different beams and are scheduled within the same time slots. the proposed mimo solution introduces a novel philosophy that does not try to arbitrarily allocate users to a predefined beam according to their position in the multibeam coverage as suggested in known schemes . that way, in a mimo ffr scheme, the beam pattern is resolved and reduced to nothing more than a shaping of the power flux density on earth. such a beamfree approach was first proposed in . in a further step, this new concept might be used as another degree of freedom for throughput optimization, even leading to dynamically adaptable shaping depending on the capabilities of the satellite antenna multibeam architecture. in this work, an innovative hts system design with a joint optimization of a smart gateway relying on spatial mimo together with a novel scheduling algorithm in the user links is addressed. in order to follow the proposed ideas for the novel mimo hts application, some basic findings on mimo for los satelite channels are needed. section ii has been reserved for this aspect. the proposed mimo hts system is then thoroughly described in section iii, and the performance is assessed in terms of the sum throughput in section iv. section v concludes the paper.

notation: im denotes the m × m identity matrix and 1 is an all ones vector of proper dimension. operator (.)∗ denotes the complex conjugate while (.)t and (.)h denote the transose and the complex conjugate transpose of a matrix or a vector. the functions diag{.} and tr{.} abbreviate the diagonal and trace operators. the notation (cid:4).(cid:4) represents the euclidean vector norm and |.| gives the absolute value of a scalar. the operator min{.} (or max{.}) returns the minimum (or maxium) value. the symbol (cid:5) is the hadamard product, i.e., the element wise multiplication of two matrices, and the operator (cid:6)x(cid:7) gives the greatest integer less than or equal to x. finally, (.)+ represents the moore penrose pseudo inverse of a matrix.

ii. mimo satcom basics

in this section, the basics on mimo over satellite for fss are summarized. the focus is on the mimo satellite channel and its correct modeling as a prerequisite for reliable system performance predictions. the channel capacity is used as a measure to assess the channel properties. we will show that the signal phase is a key property of the electromagnetic (em) waves that needs to be considered in order to obtain high mimo gains. we introduce the mimo free space propagaion model and neglect atmospheric effects for now. however, section ii f will later be solely devoted to the discussion of atmospheric effects. since the free space medium is isotropic, the channel is reciprocal and it is, therefore, sufficient to initially concentrate on the downlink. the presented results provide the necessary fundamentals for the discussion of the proposed mimo hts system architecture covering both the uplink and the downlink channel.

a. free space mimo satcom channel model

we consider a mimo satellite downlink for fss between n satellite transmit antennas in the geostationary earth orbit (geo) and m earth station receive antennas. the satellite acts as the mimo transmitter while the fixed earth station is the (cid:3) t is the vector mimo receiver. the vector y = of receive signals at a given time instance with ym denoting the signal in complex baseband notation at the m th receive antenna. y is calculated as (cid:2)

with x = [x1, . . . , xn]t and η = [η1, . . . , ηm]t. the symols xn and ηm are the transmit symbol at the n th satellite antenna and the noise contribution at the m th receive antenna, respectively. the noise entries are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) circularly symmetric complex gaussian varibles which are uncorrelated with the data symbols. the matrix h ∈ cm×n denotes the mimo channel matrix. the calculation of its entries is detailed in the following. (1) we focus on frequency bands well above 10 ghz. in those frequency bands, high gain and directive antennas are required to obtain a sufficient link budget and close the link with high throughput. moreover, narrow main beams with low side lobe levels effectively suppress interfering signals from and to neighboring satellite systems, and are, therefore, a design objective for earth station antennas operating with geo satelites . relying on such typical earth station antennas, it is assumed that any multipath contributions are suppressed by the directional antennas. neglecting the atmospheric effects, the satellite channel can be described using a deterministic los model based on the free space wave propagation.

the los channel coefficient hmn between the n th satellite antenna and the m th earth station antenna, which corresponds to the (m, n) th entry of h, is given in the equivalent baseband notation by

here, λc = c0/fc denotes the wavelength of the carrier with frequency fc, c0 is the speed of light, and amn = λc/(4πrmn) · ejϕ models the free space propagation gain. the parameter ϕ stands for the common carrier phase and can be assumed to be zero without loss of generality (w.l.o.g.). the parameter rmn denotes the distance between the n th satellite transmit antenna and the m th earth station receive antenna. on the right hand side of (2), we applied the approximation amn ≈ n a = λc/(4π ¯r) with ¯r = 1/(mn) · n=1 rmn. this is reasonable because the difference between the path lengths is very small compared to their mean total length.1 note again that this model will be extended in section ii f to additionally take relevant atmospheric effects into account.

it is also important to note that ray tracing through the parameter rmn has been applied to exactly determine the phase entries of h. this is referred as the spherical wave model (swm) in the literature and stands in contrast to the plane wave model (pwm) which assumes no relevant phase diferences between the entries of h . as shown in the following, the application of the swm is a fundamental prehe capacity provided by a requisite to correctly forecast mimo satellite system and to derive the relevant design crieria for its capacity optimization. this is detailed in the next section.

consider again the downlink scenario, in which the singleatellite is the mimo transmitter and the earth station is the mimo receiver. based on the deterministic los model in (2), the time invariant mimo channel capacity without channel knowledge at the transmitter is given by (cid:6)(cid:6) .

1to give an example: assume that one earth station antenna is located at the sub satellite point while a second earth station antenna has a relative distance ◦ to the first earth station antenna of 3 in geographical longitude (corresponds to a distance of approximately 340 km). in this case the relative error is −4. in other words, the magnitude of the amplitude approximately 2.9 × 10 has an error of 0.04 db at 20 ghz, which can be neglected. here, ρ is the carrier to noise power ratio (cnr), which is defined as the ratio of the transmit power per satellite antenna to the noise power per earth station receive antenna.

to illustrate the dependence of the channel capacity on the properties of h, let us decompose the mimo channel into parllel sub channels, so called eigenmodes, with a singular value decomposition (svd) of the form h = u(cid:7)vh. moreover, to ease the mathematical notation, v = max{m, n} and u = min{m, n} are introduced. the matrices u and v are both unitary and constitute an orthonormal basis of the column and row spaces of the channel matrix h, respectively. the matrix (cid:7) is a rectangular diagonal matrix with u non negative singuu of h, sorted in descending order on lar values the main diagonal. using this decomposition, we obtain the equivalent model √ √

˜y = (cid:7) ˜x + ˜η, (4) with ˜y = uhy, ˜x = vhx and ˜η = uhη. this way, the mimo system from (1) is transformed into u parallel and non interfering single input single output (siso) channels.

the channel capacity of this system is calculated by the

sum over all parallel sub channels, i.e.,

where γu are the eigenvalues of hhh. they equal the square of the singular values of h. since hhh is positive semi definite, (cid:8) the eigenvalues are in the range of 0 ≤ γu ≤ tr = (cid:4) γu = uv|a|2. the magnitude of the u th singular value in (cid:7) represents the channel gain of the u th equivalent siso channel or eigenmode. hhh

to explain the condition for which the maximum mimo let us rewrite (5) as c = u . since the log=1 arithm is monotonically increasing, c is maximized by maxi (1 + ργu). it can be shown by basic algebra that, mizing if the sum of u non negative numbers is fixed, their product is maximized for the case where they are all equal. therefore the mimo capacity is maximized when all eigenvalues are γu = uv|a|2, the optimal eigenvalue proqual. since file must be γu = v|a|2 ∀u. in this case, a cnr gain of v and a multiplexing gain of u is achieved, and (5) yields channel capacity is achieved, (cid:10)(cid:11) (cid:4) (cid:12)

from (6), it is clear that the multiplexing gain is limited to u, i.e., the maximum number of parallel sub channels of h. therefore, an additional antenna at the link end with v antenas does not increase the multiplexing gain, but increases the cnr by a factor of v + 1. however, as long as all u eigenalues are equal, the channel capacity is maximized according to (6), and h is called an "optimal mimo channel". for m > n (respectively, m ≤ n), all column (row) vectors of h are then pairwise orthogonal and have equal norm. the latter is actually always fulfilled for the pure los channel matrix since all the coefficients have identical magnitude. if m = n, h is a scaled unitary matrix having orthogonal row and column vectors, i.e., hhh = hhh = m|a|2im. (cid:9) (5)

(6) a simple 2 × 2 example of an optimal mimo channel is (cid:14) h = a , which again highlights the need to model the different phase entries of h. here the two transmit signals impinge phase aligned at the first receive antenna, and they exhibit a phase difference of π at the second receive antenna. a phase difference of π corresponds to a difference among the path lengths of λc/2. the condition to obtain such chanels will be derived in section ii c, and it will be shown in section ii d that this condition requires particular spacings between the antennas at the transmitter and the receiver.

consider now the example where all receive signals at each receive antenna are nearly phase aligned, i.e., the pwm can be applied. all path lengths are approximately equal and the channel matrix is h ≈ a 1 . this is the so called "key hole channel" , which provides only one sub channel or eigenmode. all eigenvalues are zero except of one that is γ1 = uv|a|2. the keyhole capacity constitutes the lower capacity bound for mimo systems and is given as

it is used for comparison purposes in the following.

in this section, the general criterion for "optimal" mimo satellite channels is derived. we have shown that the pure los channel matrix h is optimal if all row (or column) vectors in case of m ≤ n (or m > n) are pairwise orthogonal. this requirement can be formulated as

an appropriate choice of the various distances between the transmit and receive antennas is the key to satisfy (9) since the other parameters are constant for all n phasors.

to find a solution for (9), we first consider the following

note that vkl and κkl can be different for different value pairs of (k, l) because the n phasors in (9) for one particular set of (k, l) are independent of any other value pair (k(cid:15), l(cid:15)). the solution in (13) is the very general condition to obtain optimal mimo satellite channels with arbitrary antenna numer under los conditions. note that no particular constraints with respect to (w.r.t.) the geometrical arrangement of the antenna elements have been applied so far.

if we assume the antennas are arranged as uniform linear arrays (ulas), (13) can be simplified to achieve the result reported in . if ulas at both link ends are applied and a large distance between the transmitter and receiver compared to the array dimensions is assumed,3 it can be revealed through geometrical analysis that

this result has first been published in in 2008 for mimo satcom applications. although the derivation has been slightly different and was limited to n = 2 satellite antenas, (15) tackles the solution presented in . it satisfies (9) under the constraint that ula geometries are used at both link ends. moreover, the result remains valid for m > n by replacing n with m on the right hand side of the equation. if the differences between the path lengths satisfy (15), the resulting mimo los channel exhibits the maximum channel capacity according to (6). condition (15) leads to particular requirements with respect to the positioning of the antenna elements as presented next. moreover, the analysis shows that the signal phase must be taken into account. (15)

d. optimal mimo satcom antenna positioning

in the following, we apply the result of (15) to obtain maximum capacity mimo satcom links. to this end, we need to calculate the distances between the transmit receive antenna pairs, which are determined by the geographical locaions of the antenna elements on earth and in space. a set of geometrical design parameters is introduced that exactly defines the geographical locations of the antenna elements. the signal phase must moreover, the analysis shows that fig. 1. m = 2 earth station antennas and n = 2 satellite antennas are shown. parameter definition to describe the antenna positions, exemplary

be taken into account. this is fundamentally different from the great bunch of existing publications on mimo satellite systems, which apply a pwm through narrow antenna spacng and can, therefore, never achieve a higher capacity than keyhole.

all the required parameters are illustrated in fig. 1. the antenna locations are defined using an earth centered, earth fixed (ecef) coordinate system. for the sake of simplicity, the distance between the earth's center and any point on its surace is set equal to the mean earth radius r⊕ = 6, 378.1 km. since the distance between the earth station antennas is small compared to r⊕, the earth curvature is neglected. it will be shown later in this section that this simplification has a negigible impact on the optimal design of the mimo satellite link. the orientation δe characterizes the angle between the east west direction and the antenna array. the pair of latitude φe and longitude θe specifies the center of the antenna array, and de is the inter antenna distance. this allows to fully charcterize the position of the ground antennas. the positioning vector of the m th earth station antenna in three dimensional cartesian coordinates is given in (16) as shown at the bottom of this page, where de,m = de · (m − 1/2 − m/2).

at the satellite, the antennas are considered to be positioned in the equatorial plane. denoting θs as the longitude of the center of the antenna array, ds as the inter antenna spacing, and ro = 42, 164.2 km as the ideal geo radius, the posiion of the n th satellite antenna in three dimensional cartesian coordinates is given by

based on the previous parametric characterization, the disance rmn between the m th receive antenna and the n th satellite transmit antenna is then given by (cid:15) (cid:15)ae,m − as,n rmn = (cid:5) (cid:14)mn = 2 + (cid:15) (cid:15) = r · (1 + (cid:14)mn)1/2, with /r2 (cid:6)

approximating the square root in (18) by its second degree

taylor polynomial derived around (cid:14)mn = 0 provides

with respect to the desired accuracy of the taylor approxmation in (20), we require the absolute value of the total error |(cid:17)r| of the left hand side of (21) to be much smaller than the carrier wavelength λc. in particular, the residual shall be a fraction of the carrier wavelength only, for example |(cid:17)r| ≤ 1/100 · λc, in order to obtain reliable results. computer simulations have shown that in all practically relevant cases |(cid:17)r| ≤ 3.8 × 10−6 m, which is sufficiently small to support carrier frequencies of more than 100 ghz.

as expected, the two key parameters of the solution in (21) are the antenna spacing de on earth and ds in orbit. the spacing required is linearly proportional to the transmittereceiver distance r and the wavelength, i.e., dsde ∝ rλc. since r ≥ 35, 786.1 km, comparably large antenna spacings ds, de are required to satisfy (21).

the minimum array dimensions are generally obtained if both antenna arrays are in broadside and the earth station is at the sub satellite point. in this case, we have ψ = −1,

(16) fig. 2. minimum spacing de versus antenna spacing in orbit, shaded areas indicate useful ranges related to the categories: (a) single satellite applications, (b) collocated satellite applications, (c) multiple satellite applications.

α = β = 0, and r = rmin. the minimum spacing of the earth station array becomes de = rminλc/(nds) if we set v = 1. smaller values of de lead to severe spatial interference because the receive array is no longer capable to spatially resolve each transmit antenna. all transmit signals can no longer be disinguished at the receiver and the mimo channel converges to the keyhole channel with h ≈ a . a similar limit is also known as the rayleigh criterion describing the resolution limit of optical systems.

fig. 2 shows the relation between de and the antenna spacng in orbit for different carrier frequencies. since a wide range of values is provided the curves are shown in doubleogarithmic scale. for large antenna separations in orbit, it is convenient to define the orbital separation (cid:17)θs, given in degrees on the lower x axis, while the upper x axis shows ds in meters. the values are valid for m = n = 2, but can easily be scaled to higher antenna numbers using the relation de ∝ 1/n. since ψ = −1 and α = β = 0, the antenna arrays are in broadside orientation, i.e., δe = 0◦, and (cid:17)θ = 0◦. as indicated by the shaded areas in fig. 2, we propose to clasify mimo satcom systems into three basic categories. for each category a particular range of antenna spacings in orbit is basically feasible as follows.

(a) single satellite applications: all mimo antenna eleents are on a single satellite and the useful antenna spacing is in the range of 1 m≤ ds ≤ 10 m. a very promising and completely novel system proposal of this category is presented in the remainder of this paper.

(b) collocated satellite applications: multiple satellites occupy a single orbital slot. each satellite has one mimo antenna element. a sufficient minimum separation between the spacecrafts must be ensured to account for inaccuracies of the tracking system and the thrusters . the upper bound is the station keeping window, which is typically ±0.05◦ in longitude. we assume practically feasible antenna spacings to be in the range of 0.014◦ ≤ (cid:17)θs ≤ 0.05◦ (or equivalently 10 km≤ ds ≤ 40 km). applications of this category are very similar to the single satellite case but at increased complexity since novel spacecraft co location strategies are required. fig. 3. optimal antenna spacing de as a function of ula orientation angle δe or relative longitude (cid:17)θ and ψ, m = n = 2, φe = 0 , fc = 20 ghz (single satellite applications).

(c) multiple satellite applications: multiple satellites with one mimo antenna each are located at different orbit posiions resulting in a spacing of (cid:17)θs ≥ 0.1◦. this category of applications requires non directional antennas at the ground segment because directional antennas cannot point at differnt orbital slots at the same time. as a promising application, uhf satcom has been proposed in , and uhf mimo satellite channel measurements reported in have shown a significant increase of the channel capacity.

fig. 2 emphasizes which spacing between the earth staion antennas is at least required depending on the mimo satcom category considered. in the single satellite case, the minimum antenna spacing on earth is approximately between 10 km and 100 km. smaller antenna spacings de require larger spacings in the orbit, leading to collocated satellite applications or to multiple satellite applications. note that larger but still optimal values for de can be obtained if v > 1, v (cid:2) n, is chosen because the optimal antenna spacing scales with vλc/n, v (cid:2) n. the term (ψ + 0.21αβ/(cid:17)r2) ∈ [ − 1, +1] in (21) can be interpreted as a reduction factor because it apparently reduces the actually needed antenna spacings de and ds, dependng on the parameters δe, (cid:17)θ and φe. if the earth station ula and the satellite ula are not in broadside, we get (cid:22) (cid:22) (cid:22) < 1, and the antenna spacing has to be (cid:22)ψ + 0.21αβ/(cid:17)r2 increased accordingly to still satisfy (21).

this required adjustment is shown in fig. 3 with respect to de. two 2 × 2 cases are considered: first, the earth station ula is rotated by δe while the angles φe = (cid:17)θ = 0◦ are fixed. this means that the earth station ula is located at the sub satellite point. this case corresponds to the solid curves, and the lower x axis shows δe in degrees. the second case corresponds to the dashed curves and the relative longitude (cid:17)θ is increased while φe = δe = 0◦ are fixed. in both cases (cid:22) (cid:22) (cid:22)ψ + 0.21αβ/(cid:17)r2 (cid:22) = |ψ| as shown on α = β = 0 and, thus, the upper x axis. in all cases, comparably large angular values of δe and (cid:17)θ are allowed for which the optimal spacing de remains approximately constant. this is due to the fact that the increment of de relates to the cosine of the respective angles. taking the solid blue curve for ds = 6 m as an example, the optimal de has to be increased by only about 7 km compared to fig. 4. capacity vs. antenna spacing on earth for various antenna spacing at the satellite (single satellite applications).

the increment of the dashed curves is slightly higher because the transmitter receiver distance r also increases with increasing (cid:17)θ . however, assuming a fixed optimal earth staion spacing of de = 50 km at (cid:17)θ = 0◦ (blue dashed curve in fig. 3) and accepting 10 km deviation from this optimum spacing to account for practical implementation constraints, a very large part of the geo arc of more than (cid:17)θ = ±30◦ can be used. in other words, once an optimal setup has been implemented in terms of a ground station installation, it can be used for a wide range of satellite positions without sigificant capacity degradation. therefore, the presented design constraint does not at all impose a flexibility disadvantage to the system.

to estimate the degradation of the mimo capacity if the antennas are not optimally spaced, simulation results of c as a function of de are shown in fig. 4. the curves relate again to the 2 × 2 downlink at 20 ghz. a receive cnr ρ|a|2 = 10 db is assumed. first, all curves of 10 log10 show the expected periodic behavior. each capacity maximum corresponds to one particular value of v.

for example, the first and second maximum of the blue solid curve at approximately 50 km and 150 km correspond to v = 1 and v = 3, respectively. the keyhole capacity is obtained for v = 2 at 100 km because in this case v is a multiple of n = 2. moreover, a large deviation of the optimal spacing de on earth is indeed possible without a significant loss of copt. taking again the blue solid curve for ds = 6 m as an example, ±10 km around the first optimal value of 50 km is allowed to still obtain 8.6 b/s/hz (the maximum is 8.8 b/s/hz). this is approximately 98% of copt. the curves reveal that large deviations in all directions even in the kilometer range can be accepted and still close to maximum capacity values are obtained. the same is true regarding possible displacements of the satellite in the geo. since orbit perturbations cause apparnt displacements of the satellite w.r.t. its ideal geostationary position, the inclination and eccentricity vary over time. the amplitude of the overall orbital motion is specified by the station keeping box, whose limits are usually ±0.05◦ in lonitude and latitude and 4 × 10−4 in eccentricity . in the single satellite case, movements by this order of magnitude can generally be neglected. a displacement of the satellite in geographical longitude by 0.05◦ from its optimal position results in a variation of the relative longitude, i.e., (cid:17)θ ± 0.05◦. the effect upon the optimal spacing of the earth station antennas has already been discussed by means of the dashed curves in fig. 3. the slope of the curves increases for larger values of the relative longitude (cid:17)θ . taking (cid:17)θ = 80◦ as an example, an adjustment of the earth station antenna spacing of 8.2 × 10−4 m would be required in order to compensate the satellite's longitude drift. such values are far too small to have a remarkable impact on the channel capacity, so that the related effects can be neglected.

in short, we conclude that for single satellite applications: • the required positioning accuracy of the earth station antennas is manageable in practice. several kilometers of antenna displacements in each direction are possible while still achieving very high, nearly optimal capacities. • satellite movements in the station keeping window can

a large part of more than ±30◦ of the geo arc can be covered with the same earth station installation while limiting the capacity degradation to less than 2%.

the measurements reported in ultimately confirm the presented theory.4 to conclude this introductory section about the basics of spatial mimo over los satellite channels, atmopheric impairments and the issue of differential signal delays need to be discussed.

f. atmospheric impairments and further aspects

1) atmospheric impairments: in the frequency bands above 10 ghz, the main radiowave propagation impairments origiate from the troposphere and include attenuation effects as well as phase disturbances . an amplitude attenuation decreases the signal power, resulting in a lower cnr for the affected antenna. such a loss entails a capacity degradation similar to what would be observed in a siso system sufering from the same attenuation . on the other hand, the impairments of the signal phase might affect the optimal phase relations within the channel matrix h and disturb the optimal eigenvalue profile. fortunately, the channel capacity is not changed if the signal paths originating from the same antenna experience identical phase impairments . this later property can be reasonably considered to be verified in practice. the assumption of identical phase impairments is based on the geometrical analysis of an optimal mimo satellite link fig. 5. proposed system architecture: (a) two spatially separated gateway antennas are fed with signals by a common gateway station (central processing). (b) schematic diagram of the proposed payload: both gateway (gw) beams share a common frequency resource (v band). the payload is designed to translate all incoming frequency bands to the same frequency band in the ka band in order to enable ffr. the colors of the bandpass filters indicate the corresponding frequency range according to fig. 6. (c) geographical illustration of the 16 spot beam footprints. the dotted lines represent the 3 db contours of the multiple beams. the source feed and reflector are labeled inside every footprint.

where the horizontal separation in the troposphere of two los paths rm1 and rm2 is very small. in fact, the example in [28, eq. (7)] reveals a horizontal separation of less than 1 cm. this theoretical assumption has been verified through interferometric measurements in the ku band at 12.5 ghz reported in . the results prove that differential phase disurbances between neighboring los paths can be neglected. moreover, the long term measurements have also shown that, once an optimal mimo satellite link has been established, the maximum mimo capacity can be obtained sustainably. it is, therefore, reasonable to model a common attenuation and phase shift for signal paths stemming from or arriving at the same earth station antenna.

the atmospheric impairments for the m th earth station antenna are expressed as ςm = |ςm|·e−jξm , where |ςm| ∈ [0, 1] and ξm ∈ [ − π, π [ represent respectively the additional ampliude attenuation and the phase shift. the attenuation in db is obtained as

the los free space channel coefficient in (2) is, thus, extended to ˜hmn = hmn · ςm. it follows for the impaired channel transfer matrix

with d = diag{ς1, . . . , ςm}. the influence of the weather impairments on the mimo feeder link of an hts system will be analyzed in section iii.

2) differential signal delays: a known issue of mimo satellite links is the large difference in the propagation delay between the los paths . the time of arrival of the mimo signals at the receiving antennas can vary by hundreds of a symbol duration because of the large antenna spacing. this results in an asynchronous reception of those symbols which form a part of a single code word. to tackle this issue, a single carrier frequency domain equalization (sc fde) concept has been applied in . by using a sufficiently long guard interval, the different arrival times of the symbols can be compensated. the unavoidable loss in bandwidth efficiency depends on the length of the guard interval in relation to the frame length and usually does not exceed 5% . an advantage of sc fde compared to other waveforms, which also rely on the use of a guard interval like orthogonal frequency division multiplexing, is its very low peak to average power ratio. however, modern waveforms currently discussed as 5g candidates are also potentially suitable to address these differential propagation delays in future systems.

iii. mimo hts system proposal

relying on the result of section ii, we now apply the mimo concept to an hts system. with an hts system, the limitations of a broadcast scenario can be tackled and multiple users can be served with individual data streams. hts systems represent the most recent and powerful satellite architecture for high data rate unicast and multicast commuications. we will show how greatly these systems can benefit from spatial multiplexing in both their uplink and their downink, to maximize the sum throughput. the considered fss scenario belongs to the class of single satellite mimo appliations since one hts equipped with several antennas will be assumed.5

we recall that the objective of the considered illustrative example is to show the tremendous performance gain of a mimo hts system in terms of data rate if the mimo los system design approach from the previous section is considred. to this end, the proposed hts system architecture with a mimo feeder link and a mu mimo downlink is presented first together with the equivalent baseband model. the system model will be used in section iii e to design the precoding strategies aimed at improving the spectral efficiency of the system. section iii d describes the scheduling approach based fig. 6. single polarization frequency plan for the upnd the downlink: ffr is applied in the downlink (ka band), so all 16 beams share a common frequency band. the multiplexing gain enables a parallel transmission of two feed signals by the feeder link within the same frequency segment of the v band. the numbers indicate the corresponding beam according to fig. 5.

on the algorithm in that allocates the resources to individal households. simulation results are provided in section iv to finally assess the system performance in terms of sum rates in comparison to the state of the art.

the mimo hts system architecture is depicted in fig. 5. here we concentrate on the forward link, i.e., the link from the gateway to the users. since a complete transmission chain with the uplink and the downlink is now considered, the mathmatical notation to distinguish both parts will be adapted accordingly.

1) mimo feeder uplink: the earth portion of the mimo feeder link consists of n = 2 gateway antennas, separated by several kilometers (30 km to 50 km) and inter connected via a central processing unit which supervises the generation of the transmit signals. time and phase synchronization of the antenas is ensured. rf over fiber transport can, for example, be used for this purpose . this technology has been successully applied at the nasa deep space network, where antennas separated by more than 10 km must be synchronized for deep space communications. in the following, it is assumed that the inter connection between the gateway antennas is perfect. at the satellite, zr = 2 receive antennas are positioned in the orbital plane ds = 3 m apart, constituting the receive array of the mimo feeder link. to operate this feeder link, the bands 42.5 43.5 ghz and 47.2 50.2 ghz are exploited such that a total bandwidth of 4 ghz per polarization state is availble. the receive antennas cover the same geographical region centered in the middle of the gateway array, and the assumpion is made that their beamwidth is sufficiently large. in that way, the antennas are relatively close to the beam center, and the receive antenna gain is maximum for all transmit receive antenna links.

the satellite payload relies on a bent pipe architecture with cross strapping from the v band feeder uplink to the ka band user downlink. no signal processing is considered in the payoad to keep the satellite complexity low. nevertheless, we observe that some sample based signal processing could be envisioned. an architecture supporting digital transparent proessing, known as digital bent pipe, would then be required. we will leave the further development of this possibility for future research. some hints can be found also in and . it has to be noted that, to support the large aggregate user link bandwidth of a hts system, several tens of spatially seprated feeder links with a full reuse of the available frequency band are actually required in practice . to this end, sevral feeds are installed on the receive reflectors in order to cover different sites on earth. in this case, an advantage of the mimo approach lies in the fact that the necessary number of spatially separated links can be halved compared to statef the art siso links (e.g., 15 mimo feeder links instead of 30 siso links) . meanwhile, the total number of active gateway antennas in the system remains the same since two gateway antennas per feeder link are now used.

the resort to mimo feeder links can be intuitively seen as a solution to rearrange the antennas such that part of the interference between typical siso feeder links is transformed into an information bearing signal using spatial multiplexing. with a mimo based architecture, the angular separation of the different feeder links in a given region of deployment (e.g., northern america) can indeed be increased to improve the beam isolation. in general, a distance of several hunreds of kilometers is required between the sites to guarantee sufficiently high carrier to interference ratios (cirs).

here, the uplink part of the considered forward link conists of a single feeder link because the goal of the example is simply to illustrate how spatial multiplexing can be realzed in a given link. the downlink of the studied hts system will be dimensioned such that its sum user link bandidth equals the sum bandwidth that can be supported by its uplink.

2) multibeam downlink: the downlink part of the hts system is made of zt = 16 ka band user beams delivering different data contents to fixed single antenna user terminals (uts). on the satellite a single feed per beam (sfpb) archiecture with zrefl = 4 multibeam reflectors is considered. the reflectors are geometrically arranged as a uniform circular array with a diameter of 3 m.

on earth a total of ktot user terminals (uts) are uniformly distributed over the area covered by the zt beams. these uts are, for example, conventional single antenna installations on a roof top of a building to serve households with individual data traffic. the comparison in the results section will be made to the conventional fr4 scheme where the same distribution of ktot customers is assumed. this ensures a fair comparison between both schemes and allows a general conclusion from the simulation results. these results can be further extended to other user distributions, scheduling approaches or precoder designs from and .

a downlink bandwidth of 500 mhz within the range of 19.7 20.2 ghz is available for the entire service zone. since an ffr scheme is addressed, this frequency band is jointly utilized by all beams.

it is known that the achievable multiplexing gain offered by mu mimo is limited by the number of channel inputs. only a group of up to zt = 16 uts can be served simulaneously via space division multiple access (sdma). thus, the user downlink forms at most a 16 × 16 mimo channel. since ktot (cid:20) zt, additional user scheduling is necessary to build groups of uts that will be served in different orthogoal resource blocks. these different resource blocks can be, for example, separate time or frequency slots based on a time diviion multiple access (tdma) or frequency division multiple access scheme, respectively. our approach to schedule the ktot users will be explained in more detail in section iii d. 1) mimo feeder uplink: the mimo feeder link channel is modeled in the equivalent baseband using a block diagonal matrix ˜hu,1, . . . , ˜hu, zt where ˜hu,l is a 2 × 2 channel matrix between the n = 2 gateway antennas and the zr = 2 satellite receive antennas. the index l distinguishes the zt/2 different center frequencies required due to the use of fdma in addition to sdma in (u) the feeder uplink. each entry ˜h l,zn corresponds to the channel coefficient from the n th gateway antenna to the z th satellite receive antenna at the l th center frequency and takes both the free space propagation and the atmospheric impairments into account.

˜hu,l = hu,l · d (cid:5) gu, with hu,l ∈ c2×2, the mimo los channel matrix whose free space propagation coefficients are determined according to (2). again, the matrix d ∈ c2×2 is a diagonal matrix modeling the atmospheric impairments experienced by the gateway antenas. we observe that, in contrast to (23), the multiplication with the matrix d is performed on the right hand side since an uplink channel is now considered. the atmospheric impairents for the n th earth station should thus affect the n th column of ˜hu,l.

as already mentioned, rain attenuation represents a severe impairment in the q/v band and imposes strong constraints on the link budget. it has motivated the development of gateway diversity schemes to ensure system availability , . in the sequel, the assumption is made that rain attenuation is the only weather impairment affecting the receive power in the feeder link. other types of fading effects can indeed be compensated by an uplink power control scheme. in the results section, the proposed mimo feeder link will be evaluated for different rain attenuations a1 at the first gateway antenna given a fixed a2 at the second antenna.

the elements of matrix gu ∈ c2×2 model the normalized radiation patterns of the satellite receive antennas. they can be calculated as

with uzn = π d/λc sin(ϑzn), and j1(uzn) and j3(uzn) being the bessel functions of first kind and order one and three, respectively. we assume the same diameter d for all satelite receive antennas, and ϑzn is the off axis angle of the z th beam's boresight to gateway antenna n.

in order to take the best advantage of spatial multiplexing in the feeder link, the los uplink channel matrix hu,l will be designed according to the criterion (21). more precisely, the antenna geometry in the feeder link will be optimized such that a scaled unitary matrix hu,l is obtained. it will be shown that, in this case, the sum achievable rate of the hts system is maximized. in case of ffr, an arbitrary ut can potentially receive signal portions from all feeds. therefore, the downlink channel ˜hd between the zt feeds and a group of k uts is modeled as a densely populated matrix ˜hd = hd (cid:5) gd ∈ ck×zt . (27) here, hd ∈ ck×zt denotes the channel matrix that models the free space propagation according to (2) between the zt feeds and the k households, which are simultaneously served with data in one recourse block. equivalent to the uplink, the matrix gd ∈ ck×zt describes the radiation patterns of the downlink (d) multibeam antennas. the element [gd]k,z = g kz denotes the normalized antenna gain from beam z to user k. it is calculated using (26) by an appropriate choice of the antenna parameters. similar to the feeder link channel, we are seeking to design an optimal downlink channel matrix ˜hd, in which all row vecors are pairwise orthogonal. in this case the channel capacity is maximized according to (6). in contrast to the feeder link, the locations of the user antennas are arbitrary and an anaytical condition as presented in (21) cannot be applied here to derive optimal downlink matrices ˜hd. to this end, a novel user grouping algorithm has been developed in , which addresses in particular the construction of downlink matrices ˜hd with pairwise orthogonal row vectors. we will apply and extend this algorithm to our hts system proposal. it will be briefly recapped in section iii d. the major difference of our approach compared to the state of the art is reflected in the fact, that the condition of pairwise orthogonality inherently uses the signal phase as a design criterion whereas the great bunch of published work neglects the signal phase (see for example and references therein).

c. mimo hts system model

the equivalent baseband model of the hts system under study is now introduced. imperfections such as the noninearities of the power amplifiers, phase noise, or differential delay and phase among multiple pathways in the satellite payload are assumed to be perfectly compensated using a calibration method . this correction guarantees that the downlink signals are phase coherent to enable the feasibility of mu mimo precoding.

please note that, to enable the pre processing of the transmit signals in the gateways, channel state information (csi) about the uplink and downlink mimo channels is necessary. to obtain this csi, existing channel sounding strategies can be applied to estimate the amplitude and phase of the channel matrices ˜hu,l and ˜hd. one solution consists, for example, in the transmission of orthogonal training sequences like the constant amplitude zero autocorrelation (cazac) sequence in the forward link. applying the method as proposed in , the phase and amplitude information of the channel coefficients in ˜hu,l and ˜hd can be estimated via a cyclic cross correlation of the signal received by the uts with the known sequence. this information can be fed back to the gateways via the return link to enable the pre processing of the transmit signals. a small part of the available resources in the system must, therefore, be reserved for the transmission of a training sequence and the estimation of the channel. however, this is not specific to the approach presented here but applies to all types of precoding schemes for multibeam satellites.

we assume ideal csi about the uplink and downlink mimo channels in the sequel. it is known that the system performance degrades if the csi is imperfect or outdated. the performance of different precoding schemes with imperfect csi has been investigated in and , and the interested reader is kindly referred to these papers and the references therein.

fig. 7 shows a block diagram of the transmission chain with the associated notations. for the sake of a compact notation, time indices are neglected in the sequel. let s = [s1, . . . , sk]t ∈ ck×1

be the vector of data symbols to be transmitted in a given time slot to a group of k non cooperative single antenna uts, where sk is the symbol for the k th user. please note that a pure unicast scenario is considered and that, therefore, sk can be different for different k. these symbols are chosen from a contellation alphabet6 a with unit variance, and are uncorrelated such that e

in the central processing unit of the gateway, a linear transformation of the data vector s is performed using a precoding matrix b ∈ czt×k. this matrix aims to mitigate the interference between the symbols transmitted in the same frequency channel in the uplink as well as in the downink. moreover, denoting pu the maximum effective isotropic radiated power (eirp) per gateway antenna, the following condition must be fulfilled (cid:9) bh ¯qnb

≤ pu , (29) the matrix ¯qn = diag{qn, . . . , qn} is a zt ×zt block diagonal matrix where qn is a 2×2 matrix containing zeros in all entries except for the n th diagonal element which is equal to 1. that is, in ¯q1 all odd and in ¯q2 all even diagonal entries are 1 while the remaining entries are zero. condition (29) corresponds to a per antenna power constraint. it is required since the gateway antennas are equipped with their own high power amplifier (hpa).

after the transmission over the mimo feeder link,

(cid:3) t = ˜hubs + η u (cid:3) t is the vector of uplink the vector η circularly symmetric complex gaussian noise and is uncorreated with the data symbols. in the sequel, the variance per real dimension of the complex uplink noise process is equal for all zt receive branches and is denoted by σ 2 η

in the satellite payload, the coefficient as models the amplication of the hpas. the vector of channel inputs to the downlink is then given by (cid:2) xd,1, . . . , xd,zt

(cid:3) t = as with xd,z being the downlink signal transmitted by the z th feed. the downlink eirp in each beam should not exceed a where rxd is the autocorrelation matrix of xd. the gain as is consequently chosen to fulfill the constraint (32) with equality for at least one of the feeds. in other words, at least one downlink beam provides the maximum downlink eirp pd while the eirp of the remaining beams can be lower or, in the best case, equal to pd.

we note that the modeling of the satellite through a simle amplification coefficient follows from the assumption of an analog transparent architecture. in the case of a digital bent pipe, a sample based processing of the signals could be envisioned. the satellite payload would then be modelled by a non diagonal relaying matrix f ∈ czt×zt . in the user links, the receive symbols are (cid:3) ˜hubs + as t = as , (33) where η = [ηd,1, . . . , ηd,k]t is the vector of downlink circularly symmetric complex gaussian noise. this noise is uncorrelated with both the data symbols s and the uplink noise η u. assuming similar receiving equipment for all households, the variance per real dimension of the noise process at each ut is identical and represented by σ 2 η (cid:2) ˆs1, . . . , ˆsk ˜hd ˜hdη ˆs = + η

we define the receive cnr at the beam center as

where ad is the free space downlink gain as defined in (2).

d. user scheduling

as stated before, only up to k = zt households can be simultaneously served within a single resource block. in order to supply all users with individual data, scheduling is necssary, i.e., the ktot uts must be divided into groups of at most zt users. hence, in addition to spatial multiplexing, a further multiple access scheme like tdma is necessary to suport all users with individual data. note that, without spatial multiplexing, ktot resource blocks would be necessary whereas the necessary resource blocks reduces to ktot/k with spatial multiplexing.

as a major finding of section ii it can be stated that the achievable data rate of a multiuser mimo satcom scenario crucially depends on the location of the involved antennas. since the locations of the users are arbitrary and do not follow any regular placement, an analytic solution for the optimal placement, like the one that has been derived in (21) for ula arrangements, cannot be found here. however, the requirement of pairwise orthogonal channel vectors as formulated in (8) still holds.

assume an optimal setup in the sense of (8), then all k uts of a group have orthogonal channel vectors. in this case, zf precoding does not suffer from any power penalties due to the channel inversion, and can, therefore, achieve the dirty paper coding (dpc) rate region. however, the probability that such a set of uts exists is zero for a finite ktot . therefore, we aim at combining uts with channel vectors that are "nearly" or "at most" orthogonal. the orthogonality between the i th (34) and the j th ut is quantified by means of the scalar product of the channel vectors (cid:10) ˜hd,i, ˜hd,j

where (cid:2)( ˜hd,i, ˜hd,j) refers to the enclosed angle of the vecors ˜hd,i and ˜hd,j. the channel vectors are orthogonal if cos((cid:2)( ˜hd,i, ˜hd,j)) = 0.

the multiple antenna downlink orthogonal clustering (madoc) scheduling algorithm has first been pubished, in which (35) is used as a metric to determine the spatial compatibility between two uts and to build up soalled (cid:21) orthogonal groups. the main idea is to assemble uts in a common group only if (35), calculated for all combiations of uts within a group, does not exceed a certain threshold (cid:21). the proposed algorithm in is used in this paper to schedule all households into ng disjoint groups. in the optimal case, the downlink channel matrix ˜hd is then comosed of perfectly orthogonal row vectors, and each household in each group receives then individual data content without any cci. while we utilize the madoc algorithm in this paper to form user groups for unicast transmission over several beams, its metric can similarly be applied to realize a multicast transission over a single beam. in this case, (35) aims to identify channel vectors that are parallel. for the first time, this algoithm takes advantage of the spatial orthogonality offered by the mimo channel, and the spatial dimension is exploited as a further degree of freedom.

this is indeed a great advantage of the mimo technolgy. in other words, although k users still occupy the same frequency band and polarization like it would be the case in a broadcast application, their spatial separation is now exploited to distribute individual content to different households. this way, mimo answers the user's expectations for individual content like vod and supports the transition from broadcast to unicast transmission in future satellite implementations.

in our hts scenario, maximal fairness between the selected users should be ensured by the precoder. in a unicast sceario, every customer indeed expects a minimum assured data rate that is guaranteed by the satellite provider accordng to the contract model. this is fundamentally different to the broadcast scenario where all users receive the same data and the quality of experience solely depends on the individual receiving equipment. the case for feeder links, or for a large number of channel oututs as it is the case in the user links . here, the following condition must be fulfilled:

(cid:3) t, a vector of non negative numith μ = bers. a max min fairness optimization problem can then be formulated as (cid:2) μ1, . . . , μzt

the solution of (37) entails μ = μ1 . moreover, since the noise contribution in the feeder link is limited, the third constraint of (37) can be relaxed by assuming that 2σ 2 (cid:21) (cid:13) η ˜hubbh ˜hh , ∀z, and the optimization problem is now u expressed as (cid:14)

where ¯b = ˜h+ +p⊥w and p⊥ is the orthogonal projection u into the null space of ˜hd ˜hu. matrixw is an arbitrary comlex matrix. the reformulation of the optimization problem relies on the fact that a precoding matrix fulfilling the conition of (36) is of the form b = μ ¯b . it corresponds to a generalized inverse of ˜hd ˜hu. a solution to (38) is then obtained with ˜h + d

and the matrix ¯b is determined with the following secondrder cone program

(41) problem for the downlink and the uplink, respectively.7 the ˜hd with the square generalized inverse of the product of non singular matrix ˜hu is indeed equal to the product of ˜hd . the inverse of simulation results in section iv will validate the equality of both approaches. a cascade design takes into account the fact that the matrices bu and bd do not need to be updated at the same rate. in a practical system, the matrix ˜hd and, thus, the precoder bd will change at a rate of a few milliseconds. this fast change is not due to the coherence time of the downlink channel but to the user scheduling. different groups are indeed served in successive time slots. on the other hand, the charcteristics of the uplink mimo channel ˜hu do not evolve so fast, as the same fixed gateway antennas are always used. the only source of random variation in the uplink are the weather impairments. their coherence time is at least a few hundreds of milliseconds, and the same uplink precoding matrix bu can be used during this time.

for the first time we address both, the application of spaial mimo in the feeder link and the use of ffr in the user link over a transparent geo relay. system architectures in the existing literature are limited to either mimo in the feeder link8 or mimo related approaches based on ffr with a multibeam architecture in the downlink (in , , and ). the second fundamental difference to the current state ofhe art is that in our approach the signal phase of the los part of the channel is exploited. the vast majority of publiations do not consider the signal phase of the los satellite channel in their models. for example, christopoulos et al. , joroughi et al. , and diaz et al. assume a uniformly distributed channel phase in the downlink, irrespective of the user's location and the position of the feed on the payload. guidotti et al. state that the phase information in the design of the precoder is neglected. therefore, the grouping of users as well as the precoder design can only rely on the amplitude information. simulation results in section iv will show that, in this case, the achievable rate is limited. a payoad with multiple spatially separated antennas, as proposed here, would have no advantage compared to a payload with a single reflector if only the amplitude information is exploited. while neglecting the phase of the los path might be valid as long as a single antenna on the satellite is assumed, it becomes inappropriate if multiple antennas are considered. many satellites currently under procurement offer at least four reflectors mounted as side deployable antennas at a separation of 6 m to 10 m. these architectures offer the chance to exhibit additional multiplexing gains when resorting to schemes that take the signal phase into account.

7note that, in this case, csi of ˜hu and ˜hd must be available instead of the entire link from the gateway to the uts. to obtain ˜hu and ˜hd separately, ad hoc and different training sequences for the feeder link and the user link are required. to assess the performance of the proposed mimo hts system the sum achievable rate is used. the sum achievable rate can be obtained by first computing for each user its inpututput mutual information. to this end, we define an auxiliary model from (33). using c = as ˜hd

(42) where ¯η is a vector gathering the contributions of the uplink and downlink noise as well as the inter stream interference if c is non diagonal. we note that matrix c will not be diagonal ˜hu or ˜hd are rank deficient, i.e., that no zero forcing is if possible.

in practice a satellite link will be designed to avoid such a configuration. in the uplink this is ensured if the gateway antennas are located following the design criteria of (21). in the downlink this is ensured if the users who are jointly considered have nearly orthogonal channel vectors according to (8).

assuming a circularly symmetric complex gaussian distriution for the inter stream interference, the channel law for the k th user in a given resource block is

¯η,k the variance

with the knowledge of (43), the input output mutual infor

mation in bit/channel use for the k th user is given by (cid:31) (cid:4) (cid:29)

the application of (44) assumes a maximum likelihood (ml) symbol detection.

moreover, we introduce the spectral efficiency

(45) of the k th user channel for comparison, where cinrk = ckk/σ 2

¯η,k denotes the cinr of user k.

according to the considered input constellation (discrete modulation alphabet or gaussian distributed input symbols), the achievable rate in bit/s is obtained from the mutual inforation ik or the spectral efficiency ck by normalization with the symbol duration ts, i.e., rk = 1/ts · ik or rk = 1/ts · ck. the sum achievable rate is then given by

where the superscript g is introduced to take into account the fact that several user groups are considered. thus, kg and rg k denote the number of users and the achievable rate of user k in group g, respectively. finally, the rate per user beam r is defined as r = r/zt. the proposed mimo hts system. these two metrics are used in the next section to evaluate the benefit of spatial mimo in the uplink and the downlink.

the proposed mimo uplink and downlink architectures will now be evaluated for a satellite positioned at the longitude θs = 115◦ w. the feeder uplink operates in the v band, and the user downlink is in the ka band. the gateway array has an orientation δe = 0◦. it is located at latitude φe = 38 ◦ n and longitude θe = 98◦ w. finally, the zt = 16 user beams in an sfpb architecture cover the u.s. west coast where a total of ktot = 4, 000 households have to be served.

we assume a symbol rate of 1/ts = 10 mhz per cusomer. if the carrier spacing equals 1.05/ts, up to nc = (cid:6)500 mhz · ts/1.05(cid:7) = 47 carriers via fdma are supported by the 500 mhz downlink beams.

to emphasize the benefits of spatial multiplexing for an hts system, the uplink and the downlink of the system proposed in section iii will be successively replaced by a state of thert approach. here, the two following configurations will be investigated in terms of the sum achievable data rate.

a 2 × 2 mimo feeder link is compared to a siso feeder link with single site diversity, i.e., one siso gateway antenna is active while the second siso gateway antenna is in stand by.

a mu mimo downlink is compared to a conventional fr4 siso approach.

in addition to the sum achievable data rate we also assess the vulnerability of the feeder link to rain fading events. as it has already been mentioned in section ii f, a q/v band feeder link may suffer from rain fading events resulting in additional attenuations of several decibel. the simulations will show how mimo feeder links can take advantage of an additional site diversity gain that directly increases the system availability. fig. 8. sum rate vs. gateway antenna spacing de for two different weather conditions at gateway antenna one while gateway antenna two experience clear sky, i.e., a2 = 0 db.

achievable data rate. the available bandwidth in the feeder uplink is 4 ghz. due to the 2 × 2 spatial multiplexing in the mimo feeder link, a total of 8 ghz usable bandwidth is availble in the user downlink. zt = 16 downlink feeds should be supported and, thus, the households in each downlink beam can be served with 500 mhz of bandwidth.9 the siso feeder link instead can only support a bandwidth of 4 ghz in total, and, therefore, the total bandwidth per downlink beam is set for this benchmark system to 250 mhz. in this case, the numer of carriers which can be supported via fdma reduces to (cid:6)250 mhz · ts/1.05(cid:7) = 23.

in order to still meet coordinated power density limits, the eirp of the mimo feeder link must be the same as of the siso feeder link. therefore, the transmit power per gateway antenna is 3 db less in the case of a mimo gateway antenna. we assume a gateway antenna gain of 61.4 dbi, and, together with a g/t of 26 db/k per satellite antenna,10 the feeder link budget is fully defined. under clear sky conditions an uplink cnr of 24 db is achieved.

for the user links a mu mimo ffr approach with a cnr of 10 db at the center of the spot beams is always assumed. it ensures that the differences in terms of sum achievable rate between the siso and the mimo feeder links are, in this case, only influenced by the uplink design.

in fig. 8, the influence of the gateway separation de on the sum achievable rate is shown for two different weather conditions. in one scenario, the first gateway antenna does not experience any rain attenuation, i.e., a1 = 0 db, while the other scenario assumes a medium rain attenuation of

9please have in mind that we assume a transparent satellite payload. 10the g/t of 26 db/k is based on an antenna with diameter of 1.2 m, efficiency of 55% at 48 ghz and a system temperature of 500 k . since the center of coverage of both satellite antennas is at the center of the gateway ◦ array, the offaxis angle from point of boresight is only 0.017 . the resulting depointing loss is only 0.02 db. this value is too small to make a difference in the simulation results and has, therefore, been neglected. a1 = 6 db. the second gateway antenna benefits in both scearios from clear sky conditions, i.e., a2 = 0 db. for the sake of illustration, results obtained with a joint optimization and a cascaded optimization of the precoding matrix are shown in the case a1 = 0 db. the goal is to confirm that both optiizations lead actually to the same precoder. this property has been emphasized in section iii e. moreover, for comparson purposes the sum achievable rate based on the spectral efficiency according to (45) is provided (dashed blue curve). finally, the achievable rate of a state of the art siso feeder link is also displayed. in this configuration, the second gateway antenna is the only active ground station.

the sum achievable rate is maximized for a separation of around 40 km but a large range of ±15 km relative to the optimal position can be accepted without entailing serious performance degradations. the improved sum data rate of the mimo solution is the result of spatial multiplexing in the feeder uplink. although 4 ghz of bandwidth is allocated in the feeder uplink, 8 ghz of user link bandwidth instead of 4 ghz for the state of the art can be used to serve the 4,000 households in the downlink. it can be noted that the minima for values of de near 80 km and 90 km are due to the presnce of close to singular mimo channel matrices in the bands 47.2 50.2 ghz and 42.5 43.5 ghz, respectively. however, disances of more than 80 km do not belong to the region of interest for a practical system design.

the curves show also that an additional atmospheric attenation does not severely degrade the data rate performance of the mimo feeder link. even for a rain attenuation of a1 = 6 db at gateway antenna one, the mimo feeder link still outperforms the state of the art siso approach even in clearky. one reason for this small degradation is clearly the 14 db higher uplink cnr compared to the downlink cnr (24 db in the uplink vs. 10 db in the downlink). however, an addiional attenuation of 6 db at one antenna does, nevertheless, not result in a 6 db lower cnr in one of the two equivalent siso sub channels. in fact, since in an optimal mimo chanel both gateway antennas contribute equally to the receive cnr, an attenuation of 6 db at one gateway antenna results only in a 3 db lower cnr per receive antenna. apart from the multiplexing gain, the additional spatial domain usage of the mimo approach inherently provides a higher robustness against weather effects . in other words: the results clearly suggest to avoid so called "cold redundancy" w.r.t. gateway antennas, i.e., it is better to switch all available antennas on and operate them as a mimo feeder link instead of preserving antennas for outage redundancy only.

the results presented in this section illustrate the potenial of the spatial mimo concept for the feeder links of hts systems. the possibility to distribute spatially multiplexed sigals containing individual content for multiple users perfectly supports the resort of the conventional television (tv) broadast scenario to unicast transmission. please note again that the goal of this simulation example was to illustrate how spaial multiplexing can generally be realized in a single feeder link. this case, the advantage of the mimo approach lies in the reduction of the interference between neighboring feeder links. less geographically separated mimo feeder links than siso feeder links are required to provide a given amount of data to serve all households with different content in a practical hts. therefore, if the feeder links have to be deployed in a certain country or continent, interference can be more easily avoided by guaranteeing a larger angular separation between the beams . this is especially advantageous in terms of system availability as better link budgets reduce the probabilty of experiencing an outage when rain events affect the link quality .

b. user link performance

the second simulation aims to investigate the data rate performance of the proposed multiuser mimo downlink. the objective is to show the advantage of having multiple spatially separated antennas on the satellite in combination with full frequency reuse among the user beams. the result is comared to a contemporary siso scheme that is based on a single reflector with four color frequency reuse. to highlight the importance of spatially separated antennas to benefit from a mimo gain, the multiple reflector approach is also comared to a mimo downlink based on a single antenna with multiple beams and ffr.

the system parameters for this simulation are provided in table ii. as already introduced in section iii a, four reflecors form a circular array with a diameter of 3 m, and four feeds illuminate each reflector. each reflector has a diameter of 2.6 m. the feed and reflector geometry is based on a satelite that is currently in orbit . in our simulation scenario, the service zone of the zt = 16 spot beams is over north america, and we assume 250 independent and fixed singlentenna receivers per beam. the location of an individual user is randomly chosen; all users are uniformly distributed over the entire service zone. hence, in total ktot = 16·250 = 4, 000 households need to be served with data.11 the user scheduling algorithm from is now applied to determine those households that form a common group. the total number of groups and the number of households in each group actually depend on several parameters. among others, we observe a dependence on the location of the users, the threshold (cid:21), the signal to noise ratio and the total number of households that have to be scheduled . in this simulation example, for instance, we obtained the set of ng = 311 user groups. thus, in total ng = 311 mimo downlink channel matrices hd ∈ ck×zt are computed. for each ut we assume similar receiving equipment having a g/t of 16.9 db.

in order to show the benefit of spatial mimo for different signal to noise ratios, various downlink eirp values pd are simulated in each beam ranging from 51 dbw to 65 dbw. please note again that, in the case of mimo, pd constitutes the maximum power in at least one of the mimo beams while the power in the remaining beams can actually be equal to or lower than pd. this is the result of the power constraint as defined in (32). in the siso case instead, each beam provides the maximum downlink eirp pd. thus, the sum power over all beams of the siso downlink is always higher or at most equals the sum power of the mimo downlink. this ensures a fair comparison between mimo and siso.

in the ffr scheme the entire bandwidth of 500 mhz within the range of 19.7 ghz to 20.2 ghz is availble in each beam. in the case of the four color scheme instead, only 125 mhz per beam can be used. to ensure a fair comparson, the transmit power per beam is equal for both, the ffr and the fr4 scheme. as a consequence, the resulting receive cnr is even 6 db higher for the fr4 scheme than for the ffr scheme.

since the focus is now on the performance of the multiuser downlink, the feeder uplink configuration is identical for all considered cases. in particular, a 2×2 mimo feeder link in the v band is assumed, and the gateway antennas have a spacing of de = 40 km. please note that, to support the aggregated bandwidth in the user link, the occupied bandwidth in the feeder link is adjusted accordingly. while for the fr4 scheme 1 ghz of bandwidth is sufficient, 4 ghz of bandwidth is necssary to support the ffr approach. a constant uplink receive cnr of 24 db is achieved in all cases.

fig. 9 provides the simulation results of the sum achievble rate per user beam as a function of the downlink eirp pd. the blue curve corresponds to the proposed mu mimo ffr strategy with zrefl = 4 reflectors. moreover, the channel capacity based on (45) is shown again (blue dashed curve). the yellow curve shows the result of the state of the art fr4 approach with 125 mhz per user beam. as mentioned earier, the result of a mimo downlink with a single reflector that generates all the user beams is also provided (red curve). finally, the simulation results for the case that no phase inforation in the downlink channel is considered are also shown (red crosses). as mentioned in section iii f, this curve repreents the channel model assumptions from , , and , in which no los channel phase information can be exploited to form user groups or derive the precoder. the absence of los channel phase information can be manifold, for instance due to the use of a single reflector architecture in the satellite fig. 9. achievable rate per beam as a function of the downlink eirp using a mimo feeder link with de = 40 km and clear sky conditions at both gateway stations.

or due to very narrow satellite and ground antenna spacings. this explains why the los phase information might not be included in the models of some state of the art works.

the mu mimo downlink with four separated antennas offers the highest sum achievable data rate in all considered cases. to give an example: comparing the blue and the yellow curves at pd = 61 dbw, the mu mimo downlink achieves 1.2 gb/s per beam compared to 0.55 gb/s only for the siso fr4 approach. this constitutes an increase of 110 %. the satellite operator has now various options how this gain can be exploited:

1) provide simply higher data rates to the households, 2) keep the sum data rate constant and reduce the necessary downlink eirp instead, or

3) exploit the gain as an additional link margin to increase the availability of the downlink.

for example, keeping the sum achievable data rate constant would allow for a reduction of the required downlink eirp by 6.6 db. this reduction could be transferred into a lower payoad weight and power budget and, finally, cost reduction. as an alternative, the interference potential in terms of downlink adjacent satellite interference can be reduced.

moreover, the mimo downlink with four spatially seprated reflectors indeed outperforms the multibeam mimo approach based on a single reflector. the reason is simply that the spacing of the feed elements is much smaller (in the centimeter range) for the single reflector approach comared to the four separated reflectors (in the meter range). as a consequence, the spacing between two households who are part of the same group needs to be much larger,12 e.g., more than 1,000 km compared to around 50 km. since, in addition, the 3 db contour of one beam footprint is ≈ 500 km, the

12please note again the linear relation dsde ∝ rλc between the antenna spacing as a function of the wavelength λc and the ut satellite distance r, which has been introduced in section ii. as a result, the smaller the spacing in orbit the larger the spacing on earth has to be. signal energy that can be received from neighboring mimo beams is comparably low. in other words, the interference from neighboring mimo beams, which we are seeking to exploit as information bearing signal, is very low due to this large sepration of two households who are jointly served with data. low signal interference results in a mimo downlink chanel matrix with small values, and the multiplexing gain is ultimately limited.

to sum up, the simulation results have shown the data rate advantage of spatial multiplexing in both, the uplink and the downlink. through multiplexing of different data streams, multiple users can be served simultaneously over the same channel. the gain of our system proposal relies on the spatial separation of the mimo antennas.

in this work the theoretical basics of the mimo line ofight concept for fixed satellite services have been presented. it has been shown that the phase of the los signal is the key parameter to understand the possible gains of a mimo satcom system. by appropriately paying attention to the signal phase, the optimal location of the mimo antennas on earth and in orbit have been derived.

as a promising application example, the design of future hts systems has been addressed. our system proposal considred both, the use of spatial multiplexing in the feeder uplink and in the multiuser downlink. while simultaneously resorting from the conventional four color frequency reuse to the full frequency reuse scheme in the downlink, the resulting inteream interference can now be exploited as a useful signal energy that further increases the throughput. based on user scheduling and mu mimo precoding in the gateway, singlentenna users are now able to receive individual data streams over the same channel. simulation results have shown tremenous performance gains in terms of the sum achievable data rate in comparison to the state of the art. the mimo technolgy is a key enabler to boost the competitiveness of satellite communications in 5g networks.

and p. d. arapoglou, satellite communications in the 5g era. stevenage, u.k.: inst. eng. technol., 2018. k. u. storek, c. a. hofmann, and a. knopp, "measurements of phase fluctuations for reliable mimo space communications," in proc. ieee asia pac. conf. wireless mob., aug. 2015, pp. 157 162.

c. hofmann, k. u. storek, r. t. schwarz, and a. knopp, "spatial mimo over satellite: a proof of concept," in proc. ieee int. conf. commun., may 2016, pp. 1 6.

k. u. storek and a. knopp, "fair user grouping for multibeam satelites with mu mimo precoding," in proc. globecom ieee glob. commun. conf., dec. 2017, pp. 1 7.

g. giambene, s. kota, and p. pillai, "satellite 5g integration: a network

e. telatar, "capacity of multi antenna gaussian channels," eur. trans.

e. m. soop, handbook of geostationary orbits, 1994th ed., j. r. wertz,

ed. dordrecht, the netherlands: kluwer, 1994.

b. ramamurthy, w. g. cowley, and g. bolding, "mimo applicaility to uhf satcom," in proc. ieee glob. telecommun. conf. (globecom), washington, dc, usa, 2016, pp. 1 7. radiowave j.

propagation (electromagnetic waves series 54), 2nd ed. stevenage, u.k.: inst. eng. technol., 2011. e. allnutt, satellite to ground

r. t. schwarz, a. knopp, and b. lankl, "the channel capacity of mimo satellite links in a fading environment: a probabilistic analyis," in proc. conf. int. workshop satellite space commun. (iwssc), sep. 2009, pp. 78 82.

p. horvath and i. frigyes, "sat02 6: application of the 3d polarizaion concept in satellite mimo systems," in proc. ieee globecom, nov. 2006, pp. 1 5.