dimitrios christopoulos, student member, ieee, jesús arnau, student member, ieee, symeon chatzinotas, member, ieee, carlos mosquera, senior member, ieee, and björn ottersten, fellow, ieee mmse performance analysis of generalized multibeam satellite channels

abstract—aggressive frequency reuse in the return link (rl) of multibeam satellite communications (satcoms) is crucial toards the implementation of next generation, interactive satellite services. in this direction, multiuser detection has shown great potential in mitigating the increased intrasystem interferences, induced by a tight spectrum reuse. herein we present an analytic framework to describe the linear minimum mean square error (mmse) performance of multiuser channels that exhibit full receive correlation: an inherent attribute of the rl of multibeam satcoms. analytic, tight approximations on the mmse perforance are proposed for cases where closed form solutions are not available in the existing literature. the proposed framework is generic, thus providing a generalized solution straightforwardly extendable to various fading models over channels that exhibit full receive correlation. simulation results are provided to show the tightness of the proposed approximation with respect to the available transmit power.

index terms—multiuser detection, multibeam satellites, return

link, linear minimum mean square error receivers.

t owards next generation broadband, interactive, multi

beam satellite systems, higher throughput requirements especially for the return link (rl) are necessary. multiuser detection (mud) has already proven a key technique for the enhancement of the spectral efficiency of the rl and the forward link (fl) of multibeam satellite communications (satcoms). however, the inherent differences between the satellite and the terrestrial channel impose difficulties in the theoretical performance analysis of mud for satellite systems. added to that, linear mmse receivers are more difficult to analyze compared to the optimal capacity achieving successive interference cancellation (sic) techniques.

the basic characteristic of the rl multibeam satellite channel is the high receive correlation among the channels at the satellite side, resulting from the total lack of scatterers, as well as the practical collocation of the multibeam antenna

manuscript received november 26, 2012. the associate editor coordinating

the review of this letter and approving it for publication was c. sacchi.

the work of d. christopoulos, s. chatzinotas, and b. ottersten is partially supported by the national research fund, luxembourg under the project "co2sat : cooperative & cognitive architectures for satellite networks". the work of c. mosquera is partially funded by the seventh framework program project bats (grant 317533).

d. christopoulos, s. chatzinotas, and b. ottersten are with the snt feeds, at the satellite side. as a result, all the receive antennas experience identical fading instances from a specific user. specifically, each user's vector channel towards the satellite antennas is defined by the antenna radiation pattern. according to the multiplicative model and assuming block fading, the product between a single fading coefficient and the channel vector will characterize the fading instance. subsequently, the channel matrix is given by the product of a full rank multibeam gain matrix with a diagonal matrix, composed of random fading coefficients, as originally proposed in and extended in and , for more realistic system models.

linear multiuser receivers where extensively examined in . more recently, numerous contributions examined the asymptotic performance of these architectures by employing random matrix theory methods described in and the references therein. in the same field, the work of is also noted.

moreover, the mutual information of channels for which exact analytical in literature, has formulas do not exist been described via analytical, tight bounds. to this end, the minkowski's inequality was initially proposed in to provide a tight information. this technique was extended in to provide a new lower bound on the ergodic capacity of distributed mimo systems. furthermore, generic bounds on the sum rate of zero forcing (zf) receivers over rayleigh, rice and correlated channels were given in . lower bound on the channel mutual

focusing on satcoms, the performance of linear mmse to characterize analytically. in the receivers is not existing literature, two different modeling approaches have been considered. the authors of have modeled fading as the sum of two random matrices, each following a specific distribution, without however reporting results for linear reeivers. the other approach, namely the multiplicative model, was introduced in , where the performance of optimal non linear and linear receivers was given as a function of matrix arguments, with high computational complexity, for theoretical channel models. this model has been extended in , for composite, realistic channels and a novel, simple lower bound for the channel capacity has been deduced. finally, the incorporation of rain fading has been tackled in , using an identical channel model, in which asymptotic closed form expressions for the system's capacity and the mmse were derived. trivial providing an analytic framework that covers the generalized type of channels with full receive correlation.

to this end, the information theoretic link between the channel mutual information and the mmse given in , is exploited1. results on the mmse performance of the generalized satellite channel, for which the mutual information has been analytically described only through tight bounds, are proposed.

the rest of this paper is structured as follows. in sec. ii the generalized multibeam satellite channel is introduced. the analytic framework proposed is described in detail in sec. iii. simulation results are presented in sec. iv, while sec. v concludes the findings of this paper.

† notation: throughout the paper, e{·}, (·)

, denote the expectation, and the conjugate transpose of a matrix. bold face lower case characters denote column vectors and upper case denote matrices, while in denotes an identity matrix of size n.

let us consider a multiuser (mu) single input multile output (simo) multiple access channel (mac) with k single antenna terminals transmitting towards a single receiver equipped with n = k antennas. the commonly adopted asumption of symmetric systems (e.g. ) is a requisite for the analysis. as explained with more detail in , mathematical manipulations are facilitated by square channel matrices. also, in multibeam satcoms, the assumption of a single user per beam scheduled in each time slot is usually adopted , , . the input output relationship reads as

(1) where s ∈ ck×1 is the transmitted baseband signal vector, such that e{ssh} = ik, y ∈ cn ×1 is the received signal vector, n ∼ cn (0, i) is the complex noise vector and γ is the normalized transmit signal to noise ratio (snr). also, the matrix h ∈ cn ×k represents the complex valued block fading channel and admits a number of expressions depending on the model.

a. generalized multibeam channel: in the present contriution, the channel matrix is assumed to be modeled as the product of a full rank matrix with a random fading matrix. the assumption of full receive correlation, that will be hereafter considered, shall impose a diagonal fading matrix , on the multiplicative model, thus yielding h = bd1/2,

where b is a fixed, deterministic, full rank matrix with normalized power (i.e. trace(b2) = k) and d = diag(d) is a random diagonal matrix composed of the fading coefficients. the deterministic matrix b models the multibeam antenna radiation pattern, while the random elements of the diagonal matrix d, are drawn from distributions that model various small or large scale effects. subsequently, the adopted model, provides a generalized approach towards systems with full receive side correlation. by changing the fading distribution different systems can be modeled. two specific examples, relevant for multibeam satcoms will be studied hereafter.

1) composite fading: this channel has been proposed in to model the multibeam mobile satellite channel, by incorporating small scale rician fading and large scale log normal shadowing. the resulting model reads as xd,

where hd and xd are diagonal fading matrices with elements drawn from rice and log normal distributions respectively.

2) rain fading: when fixed satellite services are assumed, then the high antenna directivity imposes an awgn channel and allows for the utilization of higher frequency bands, where rain fading can dramatically deteriorate system performance. for this case the model proposed in will yield ld,

where the random elements of ld are drawn from a log normal distribution in db scale2.

iii. performance analysis

the performance of mud is evaluated via the achievable sinrk after mmse detection at the kth user, given by

averaged over the users and all channel instances, the system spectral efficiency, will be given by

(6) in bits/sec/hz. by combining (5) and (6) and directly applying the jensen's inequality the following stands

(7) thus, in common practice, another measure, namely the instantaneous, per user, minimum mean square error, is also adopted , :

the presence of the inverse of a matrix sum in (7) hinders the computation of (cid:3)2 when the eigenvalue distribution of h†h cannot be computed analytically. to solve this problem, we propose to use the approximation that follows.

lemma 1. the instantaneous per user mmse of an uplink mu simo system can be approximated by (5)

(8) proof: in , an explicit relationship between the channel mutual information ie = log2 det in bits/sec/hz and (cid:3)2 was derived by differentiating with respect to the snr. this result is easily extended for vector channels yielding

furthermore, with the use of minkowski's inequality, a bound on ie, tight over the whole snr region and exact for the high snrs, has been derived in :

by differentiation with respect to γ we get the following:

since the differentiation does not preserve the direction of the bound, the characteristics of this approximation will be studied in more detail in the following lemma. lemma 2. let ˆ(cid:3)2 be the derived approximation of (cid:3)2, then ˆ(cid:3)2 and (cid:3)2 as functions of γ, will have a crossing point.

the ordered eigenvalues of · h†h, = ie(γ) − i log (1 + γλi) and ilb (γ) = ilb(γ), where ie (γ) = (cid:9) (cid:15) log , with the following properties: 1) d(0) = 0. 2) for γo sufficiently large, but finite, we have that d(γo) = 0. from properties 1 and 2, a straightforward application of cauchy's mean value theorem yields that there will be at least one point γ∗ ∈ (0, γo), with zero derivative and subsequently a crossing point between the approximation and the actual function.

lemma 3. the average over the channel realizations, per user mmse, eh (cid:8)

function φ(x) = us ((1 + exp (x))) which is convex for x < 0 and concave for x > 0. by applying jensen's inequality over the two regions we get that (cid:18) fig. 1. multibeam antenna beam pattern for european coverage provided by the esa . a specific cluster of 7 beams (in red), is chosen.

the normal distribution, kr the rician factor, the g2 function is given as g2(s2) = log s2 + ei(s2) (as defined in ), ei is the exponential integral and s2 = kr is the non centrality parameter of the associated χ2 distribution.

proof: the expectation of the logarithm of the determiant of the specific channel matrix has been derived in . direct application of these calculations on (14) concludes the proof.

lemma 5. the per user average mmse spectral efficiency of a multibeam satellite system under rain fading (as modeled by (4)) can be approximated by the closed form formula (cid:8) (cid:8)

where μl is the mean of the equivalent log normal distribution.

proof: following the proof of lemma 3, an analytical

where ln det(b2ld) = ln + ln det ld since the matrices are square and e {ln (det ld)} = i=1 e {ln li} = k ·μl. the parameter μl is the mean of the related log normal distribution given by μl = exp(μm + σ2/2). as before, μm and σ are the mean and variance of the associated normal distribution. since b is a deterministic matrix, from the above analysis, (16) is deduced. (cid:14)k (17)

iv. simulation results

realistic beam patterns from multibeam coverage over europe are chosen to provide accurate results for the system performance. in fig. 1 the employed 245 beam pattern is visulised. this beam pattern is designed for european coverage by the european space agency (esa) and provided in the framework of . in multibeam systems, multiple gws each only serving a fraction of the total number of beamsre deployed due to limitations in the feeder link bandwidth. in order to focus on a specific gw, only a part of the total beam pattern (i.e. 7 beams) has been considered in the analysis as presented in fig. 1. these beams correspond to the beams served by a specific gateway (gw) over which mud will