qi luo , member, ieee, steven gao, fellow, ieee, wenting li

abstract—this paper presents a multibeam dual circularly poarized (cp) reflectarray for connected and autonomous vehicles. the developed reflectarray uses one aperture to realize dual band and multibeam operation. at each frequency band, there are two siultaneously shaped beams with different circular polarizations. totally four beams are obtained with a single feed and each of the beams can be independently controlled. a simple but effecive polarization suppression technique is introduced to suppress cross polarizations at large scan angles so the cp beam of the reectarray can be configured to point at large angles. thus, the present reflectarray is suitable to be applied to vehicles for reliable high data rate satellite communications. to validate the design conept, an x band prototype was designed, fabricated, and measured. the design concept is flexible and can be applied to the design of dual band, dual cp reflectarray with different frequencies ratios. moreover, the present design can also be extended to a continuous beam steering design by incorporating phase shifters.

index terms—vehicles, satcom on the move, circular polariza

c onnected and autonomous vehicle (cav) is one of

the most exciting technologies that will change the way how people and products are moved . cavs introduce many benefits, including reduction of crash rates and congestions,

manuscript received may 21, 2018; revised september 17, 2018, october 30, 2018, december 17, 2018, and january 16, 2019; accepted january 29, 2019. date of publication february 4, 2019; date of current version april 16, 2019. this work was supported by the epsrc project under grants ep/n032497/1 and ep/p015840/1. prof yang would like to thanks for the funding support from national natural science foundations of china under grant 61771300. the review of this paper was coordinated by dr. y. gao. (corresponding author: qi luo.)

q. luo, s. gao, w. li, and m. sobhy are with the department of engineerng and digital arts, university of kent, canterbury ct2 7nz, u.k. (e mail:, qiluo@ieee.org; s.gao@kent.ac.uk; m.i.sobhy@kent.ac.uk).

i. bakaimi and b. hayden are with the chemistry faculty, university of southampton, southampton so17 1bj, u.k. (e mail:,i.bakaimi@soton.ac.uk; b.e.hayden@soton.ac.uk).

c. h. kees de groot is with the faculty of physical sciences and engieering, university of southampton, southampton so17 1bj, u.k. (e mail:, chdg@ecs.soton.ac.uk).

i. reaney is with the department of materials science and engineering, university of sheffield, southampton s1 3jd, u.k. (e mail:, i.m.reaney@ sheffield.ac.uk).

x. yang is with the key laboratory of specialty fiber optics and opical access networks, shanghai institute of advanced communication and data science, joint international research laboratory of specialty fiber opics and advanced communication, shanghai university, shanghai 200444, china (e mail:,yang.xx@shu.edu.cn). , mohammed sobhy , life member, ieee,

fig. 1. demonstration of the different communication links for the cavs.

aiding mobility for disabled and older people , . it is estiated that in the uk the market for cavs will be worth 28bn in 2035 . one of the key technologies for the success of the cavs is reliable and high speed communication system. each cav needs to communicate with the base stations, satellites and other vehicles. for example, dedicated short range comunications (dsrc) are developed to enable fast and secure vehicle to vehicle and vehicle to infrastructure communication . intelligent transportation system (its) is developed to proide safer and more coordinated transport networks . satellite communication has inherent advantages such as being more roust and secure, as well as having better coverage in rural areas. thus, besides providing the navigation services to the vehicles, satellite communications will be the key technology to support cavs. satellite telecommunications companies such as intelat and inmarsat are working on satellite powered connectivity solutions for the connected cars.

fig. 1 shows the different communication links for the cavs. to communicate with the roadside unit (rsu), moderate gain antennas with wide beamwidth are used for the purpose of beter coverage . wideband antennas with broad beamwidth are used for car to car communication , . regarding the broadand satellite data service such as the direct broadcast satellite service, it is desirable to have high gain and circularly polarzed (cp) antennas with wide beam scanning angles. an array antenna with wide beam scanning angle enables vehicles to keep track of the satellites so it is always within the reception area of the satellite and does not fall in the blind spot. the traditional aproach to obtaining a high gain cp antenna is to use the phased array or reflector antenna . although the phased array has a planar configuration, it requires sophisticated beamforming netork (bfn) especially when the number of antenna elements is large, which leads to a high cost. moreover, obtaining large anle beam scanning of the cp phased array is challenging due to the reason that the radiating elements normally have narrow cp beamwidths (e.g. ±30◦). although some wide beamwidth cirularly polarized antenna elements were reported , they are not suitable for the design of planar array antennas. on the other hand, the reflector antenna can provide beam scanning through mechanically rotating the antenna. yet, the reflector antenna has a high profile and has high mass.

reflectarray antennas have attracted much research interests in recent years and have already been applied to automotive radars . they combine the advantages of the reflector anenna and the phased array . a reflectarray antenna normally consists of planar radiating elements and at least one feed anenna. to reduce the profile, folded configuration , can be used. the reflectarray use space fed technique to excite the antenna elements, thus avoiding the use of the feed network. therefore, the reflectarray is a good candidate for the design of affordable and lightweight satellite antenna system of the cavs. although there are many studies , on improving the maximum beam steering angle of linearly polarized array antennas, to date, there are few reported researches on the cp array antenna with large scan angles. recent study shows that through using a frequency scanning leaky wave antenna , circularly polarized beam scanning range from −40◦ to 25◦ can be obtained. dual cp reflectarray has also received increasing research interests. although dual cp reflectarrays can be realzed by using elements with variable rotation angles or using cp selective surfaces , there are few reports on the single aperture dual cp reflectarrays that can generate simultaneous beams with orthogonal cps and the beams can be indepenently controlled. in , a dual cp reflectarray is obtained by using a dual surface reflector and polarizer which converts the lp waves to cp waves. one dual cp reflectarray that can steer its beam to 21◦ with independent control was reported in . in this design, dual cp operation was achieved by placing one left hand circular polarization (lhcp) and one right hand cirular polarization (rhcp) selective surfaces at different layers separated by an air gap, which results in a complicated structure and high profile.

in this paper, a novel dual band reflectarray antenna with dual circular polarizations and independent beam control is deeloped. within each frequency band, there are two shaped beams, one for left hand and one for right hand circular polarzation. thus, four simultaneously focused beams are achieved for each feed. moreover, the frequency ratio of the dual band operation is flexible and the central frequency of each band can be designed independently. this allows the developed anenna suitable for the multiple input multiple output (mimo) communications for vehicles by taking advantages of the poarization and frequency diversity , . in this way, the fig. 2. concept of the dual band and dual cp reflectarray on the vehicles.

cavs can always keep reliable links with the satellites and important information such as enhanced mapping, navigational data, over the air software and firmware updates can be received in time. a simple but effective cross polarization suppression technique is developed to improve beam scanning performance of the present reflectarray. this technique does not increase the system complexity and can effectively suppress the cross polarzations so the array antenna can maintain good cp radiations at large scan angles. fig. 2 show the concept of the multibeam dual cp reflectarray on the vehicles.

this paper is organized as follows. section ii details the deign of the reflectarray unit cells. section iii presents the design and analysis of the dual band, dual cp reflectarray, as well as the cross polarization suppression technique. the simulation and measurement results of the prototypes including the simuation of the present antenna on the roof of the vehicle are given in section iv. section v concludes the paper.

ii. design of the reflectarray unit cell

fig. 3 shows the configuration of the reflectarray unit cell. two equilateral triangular patches of different sizes are posiioned in a parallelogram with one of the patches rotated by 180◦. one resonates at the higher frequency and the other resnates at the lower frequency. using this configuration, the unit cell can be used to form a dual band interleaved array antenna with a triangular lattice. the length of the equilateral triangular patch is calculated by using the formula given in :

where c is the speed of light, a is the side length of the equiateral triangular patch, εr is the relative dielectric permittivity of the substrate and mn refers to the t mm n modes. each of the triangular patches is fed by two proximity microstrip lines of 50 ω characteristic impedance. cp radiation is obtained by (1) (a) exploded and (b) side view of the unit cell of the proposed

feeding the patch with 90◦ phase difference. the feed lines are electromagnetically coupled to a branch line coupler through a rectangular aperture etched on the ground plane below the feed lines. the four ports of the coupler are terminated with 50 ω microstrip lines. the width of the feed lines is calculated by using the formulas given in .

because the feed lines are electromagnetically coupled, there is no need for using any vias, thus the fabrication complexity and cost for the reflectarray antenna design are significantly reduced. to verify the design concept, it was decided to design an x band reflectarray prototype. two frequencies within xand were selected, 8.6 ghz and 10.1 ghz, representing a frequency ratio of 1.17. it should be noted that a small frequency ratio is chosen in this study for the purpose of configuring the beam of the array to large angles without the appearance of grating lobes at both frequencies. the size of the patch can be independently adjusted to operate at different frequencies (different frequency ratio). the only constraint is the required grating lobes free beam steering angles. as shown in fig. 3 (b), the antenna element has four conductive layers and three dielectric layers. the radiating elements and the feed lines are printed on separate ro4003c substrates (εr = 3.55, tan σ = 0.0027) with a thickness of 0.3 mm. in order to keep the compact size of the branch line couplers, they are printed on a higher permittivity substrate, 0.25 mm thick ro3006 substrate (εr = 6.15, tan σ = 0.002). fig. 4. the dimensions (in millimetre) of the x band design. (a) radiating element, feed lines, and coupling slots. (b) branch line coupler.

antenna element. thus, it is necessary to simulate the unit cell of the reflectarray with periodic boundaries in order to take into account the mutual coupling between adjacent elements, and then perform some optimizations. the optimizations include changing the position of the proximity feed lines and slightly changing the size of the patches to overcome the effects caused by the mutual couplings. good impedance matching is critial for this design because poor impedance matching degrades the isolation between each polarization. after optimization, the side length of the higher band and lower band patches are choen to be 10.9 mm and 13 mm, respectively. fig. 4 shows the values of the key dimensions of the cp equilateral triangular patches.

fig. 5 shows the simulated scattering parameter of radiating element 1 (lower band antenna) and radiating element 2 (higher band antenna). the port numbers are shown in fig. 4 (b). the simulation results show that at the resonant frequencies of the two patches, the isolation is always higher than 20 db while the return loss is better than 15 db. fig. 6 shows the simulated axial ratio of the unit cell. as shown, the unit cell has low axial ratios at both resonant frequencies. within the impedance bandwidth of the patches, the axial ratio is always smaller than 3 db.

microstrip delay lines are connected to the input ports of the couplers to provide the required phase delays in order to form the shaped beams. there are two groups of phase delay lines simulated scattering parameter of (a) radiating element 1 and

for each coupler, one for lhcp radiation and the another for rhcp radiation. as a result, there are four groups, each group of the phase delay lines corresponds to the phase distribution of one beam. because these four sets of phase distribution can be defined independently and changing one set of the phase distriution has little effect on the others, these four beams can be independently controlled. the phase delay lines are designed to provide phase delays up to 360◦. fig. 7 shows the simulated reflection phase and amplitude of the unit cell at 8.6 ghz and 10.1 ghz. as shown, the phase variation is linear when the total length of the microstrip delay line increases. the insertion loss of unit cell is about 1.5 db at both resonant frequencies. besides the loss of the element itself, the insertion loss of the coupler introduces approximately 0.2 db loss. another insertion loss is from the coupled line. as shown in fig. 3 (b), to avoid the using of vias, the coupler and the phase delay lines of the patch anenna are electromagnetically coupled, which introduces around 0.4 db loss. fig. 6. ghz band. simulated axial ratio of the unit cell: (a) 8.6 ghz band and (b) 10.1

iii. design of the reflectarray

fig. 8 shows two types of reflectarray configuration that can be used for the vehicle application, considering that the antenna would be mounted on the roof of the car. one is center fed and the other is offset fed. both configurations can be realized using the same design principle. in this study, the center fed configration is used, for the purpose of simplifying the prototype fabrication and characterization.

fig. 9 shows the top and back view of the designed reflectarray antenna. as shown, two planar array antennas are interleaved in the same aperture which has a diameter of 234 mm. each of the array antennas has 75 radiating elements positioned in a trianguar lattice with a separation distance of 22.5 mm (0.64λ8.6g h z simulated reflection phase and amplitude of the unit cell at (a) 8.6

and 0.75λ10.1 ghz). with this distance, in theory, the beam can be steered to ±55◦ at the lower resonant frequency without any grating lobes. two feeds are used for the reflectarray to validate the beam switching performance and the largest beamwitching angle of the reflectarray. the positions of the feeds are defined by considering the cp beamwidth of the feed, to ensure that most of the radiating elements are illuminated by the cp waves radiated from the feed. in this design, the distance between the horn antenna and the reflectarray panel is chosen to be 135mm above the center of the planar array. an x band dual cp septum horn antenna that operates from 8 to 12 ghz is fig. 9. (a) top view and (b) back view of the present reflectarray antenna.

designed to be used as the feed of the reflectarray. the septum was designed by using the method given in .

b. cross polarization suppression technique to improve the beam scanning performance

it is always a design challenge to steer the beam of a cp array antenna to large angles. besides the increased mismatching and scan loss, which are problems experienced by the lp array anennas, the cp arrays also face the degradation of the axial ratio due to the increase of the cross polarization. in this study, an effective cross polarization suppression technique is developed to improve the beam scanning performance of the dual cp reectarray. when the present reflectarray operates in the lhcp mode, its electrical field in the far field region is expressed as

(2) fig. 10. the ideal phase differences between the lhcp and rhcp phase delay lines.

polarization components are composed of three sources −→ e t,r h c p (θ, f ) =

because the feed antenna has high polarization purity, its

since the amplitude of these two components are similar, from eq. (4), it can be concluded that if at any radiating element these two components are out of phase as shown in fig. 10, then the rhcp radiation can be suppressed.

the required phase differences can be realized by introducing an additional reference phase when calculating the required phase for each radiating element

where φr is the phase of the reflection coefficient of the antenna element i, k0 is the phase constant in vacuum, (xi, yi) are the coordinates of the array element i, di is the distance from the phase centre of the feed to the antenna unit cell, (θb , ϕb ) are the expected scan angles of the beam in spherical coordinates and δph is the additional reference phase. it is shown in that the bandwidth of the reflectarray can be improved by introducing this additional reference phase, but in this study, the additional reference phase is used to suppress the cross polarization comonents of the reflectarray.

in this work, the reflectarray has simultaneous dual cp beams at different scan angles, which means it is impossible to maintain the exact 180 degree phase differences at each radiating element. instead, in order to maximize the cross polarization suppression fig. 11. the weight coefficient used for the present reflectarray when calcuating the additional reference phase.

effect, δph should be calculated as an averaged value

where n is the total number of the radiating elements, φn ,l h c p is the required phase for antenna element n to have a lhcp focused beam and φn ,r h c p is the required phase for anenna element n to have a rhcp focused beam. in this equaion, wn is the weight coefficient and it should have larger values for the central radiating elements (where they have higher amplitudes) and the smallest value for the radiating elements in the edge (where they have the smallest ampliudes). as an example, fig. 11 shows the weights used in this study.

fig. 12 (a) shows the calculated phase distribution at 8.6 ghz to have the lhcp beam at broadside (θ = 0◦), and fig. 12 (b) shows the calculated phase distribution at 8.6 ghz to have the rhcp beam at θ = −45◦ after adding the additional reference phase calculated by using eq. (6). it is found that after aplying the developed method, most of the radiating elements have a phase difference within the range of 180◦ ± 60◦ between their lhcp and rhcp phase delay lines. thus, conjugate field matching is achieved and the cross polarization components are suppressed, which improves the polarization purity of the cirularly polarized reflectarray. applying this technique to the present dual cp reflectarray, the beam scanning range of the reflectarray is increased to larger angles. as will be presented in the next section, the maximum beam scanning angle of the reflectarray is improved to −55◦ at 8.6 ghz.

iv. experimental and simulation results

a prototype of the designed reflectarray was fabricated and measured. there are 75 radiating elements for higher and lower band operation respectively. these triangular patches are inerleaved and placed in a hexagonally shaped aperture with a diameter of 234 mm. it should be noted that the size of the anenna was chosen considering the fabrication limitation on the (6)

pcb size in the university workshop. for practical applications, the requirements on the directivity of the array can be reached by choosing the appropriate aperture size of the array antenna. the resonant frequency is determined by the size of the triangular patch and can be re sized in order to obtain different resonant frequencies. to validate the beam scanning performance of the dual cp multi beam reflectarray, two feeds were used. feed a is the one positioned above the centre of the reflectarray while feed b is offset by 22.5 mm in x axis (see fig. 9). because the prototype is a passive design, in order to verify the largest cp beam steering angles that can be achieved, the phase distribution of the reflectarray is defined to have the fixed beams pointing at its largest theoretical angles.

fig. 13 (a) (d) show the measured and simulated radiation patterns when feed a is excited. the beams are all defined in φ = 0 plane and the coordinates are given in fig. 9. during the measurement, when one feed is excited, the other feed is termiated with a matched load. in general, there is good agreement between the measurement and simulation results in the aspect of beam steering. the measurement results show higher side lobes and wider beamwidth, which are mainly caused by the phase errors from fabrication inaccuracy, the reflections from fig. 13. simulated and measured radiations patterns when feed a is excited: (a) lhcp beams at 8.6 ghz; (b) lhcp beams at 10.1 ghz; (c) rhcp beams at 8.6 ghz; (d) rhcp beams at 10.1 ghz. (black solid line: simulated rhcp, black dashed line: measured rhcp, red solid line: simulated lhcp, red dashed line: measured lhcp). the rf connectors, the mounting structure of the feed horn as well as the coaxial cables. because the designed reflectarray has a multilayer configuration and the phase delay lines are excited by electromagnetic coupling, so the alignment accuacy is the main source of the phase errors. moreover, during the measurement, one port of the dual cp horn is terminated by a broadband load, which also caused some unavoidable reflections.

fig. 14 (a) (d) show the measured and simulated radiation patterns when feed b is excited. this measurement is used to evaluate the beam scanning performance of the designed reflecarray. it is shown that at 10 ghz the angles of the beams are switched to −18◦ and −38◦ for the rhcp and lhcp beams, respectively. for the rhcp and lhcp beams at 8.6 ghz, the angles of the beams are switched to −55◦ and −7◦, respectively. all of these beams show low cross polarizations. table i sumarizes the beam angles of the reflectarray when feed a or feed b is active.

to further validate the developed cross polarization suppresion technique, a reference design that removes the phase delay lines of the lhcp port of the 8.6 ghz antenna elements was deigned and simulated. in this case, there is no cross polarization suppression from the lhcp radiation to rhcp radiation. meanhile, the theoretical radiation pattern of the reflectarray which assumes that the triangular patch is rhcp polarized was also calculated using the array theory. these results are compared in fig. 15. both simulated and calculated results confirm that withut applying the cross polarization suppression technique, there is high cross polarization at large scan angles which degrades the cp performance of the reflectarray.

fig. 16 shows the measured gain variation of the present reflectarray at different scan angles. as shown, at 10.1 ghz when the beam is steered to −38◦, the gain variation is less than 3.5 db. at 8.6 ghz, when the beam is steered to the −55◦, the gain variation is about 3 db.

fig. 17 shows the simulated radiation patterns of the develped reflectarray with one feed activated when placing it on the roof of a real size car model. the simulation was performed by using ansys savant software to predict the performance of the developed reflectarray when it is installed on the car by using the ray tracing method. as shown, the roof of the car does not affect the radiation performance of the developed array antenna and at each frequency band, there are two directional beams. this is because most of the incident wave from the feed antenna is concentrated on the array aperture. it should be noted that the developed multibeam reflectarray can be scaled to achieve a higher gain by increasing the number of the antenna elements.

table ii compares the present design with other reported dualp reflectarrays. this table also includes some reflectarrays that can be extended to the dual cp designs. the maximum beam scanning angle of some of these reported designs may possibly be increased but they were not explicitly described. compared to these designs, the present design achieves dualand and dual cp operation with independent beam control using a single aperture. meanwhile, the present design achieves fig. 15. comparison of the simulated rhcp radiation pattern of the reflecarray at 8.6 ghz with and without applying the cross polarization suppression technique, and the theoretical calculation.

the largest beam scanning range with dual cp radiation and low fabrication complexity.

the present design has the potential to be further developed to continuous beam steering reflectarrays by integrating the phase shifters (ps) to the antenna elements instead of using passive phase delay lines. this concept is shown in fig. 18. as shown, only one feed antenna is required and the four beams can be independently as well as continuously scanned within a large angle range. besides using conventional phase shifters, recent research progress on the tunable materials such as electrically tunable barium strontium titanate perovskite (bsto) films can also be applied to the array antenna design . the thin films show high relative permittivity, low loss tangent, and high tunability, which can be used to develop bsto based phase shifters. for example, the m n doped bsto films presented in show promising dielectric tunability and low insertion loss (3.2 db at 10 ghz with the coplanar waveguides). the future development in materials is expected to make these tunable materials more suitable for satcom on the move array antenna applications with moderate cost. fig. 16. measured gain variation of the present reflectarray at varied scan angles (a) 8.6 ghz and (b) 10.1 ghz.

fig. 18. the concept of continuously beam steering by incorporating phase shifters to the present cp reflectarrays.

a multibeam dual cp reflectarray for cav application is preented in this paper. the reflectarray uses a single aperture and single feed to realize four simultaneous cp beams that can be independently controlled. each of the beams corresponds to diferent frequencies and polarizations. a cross polarization supression technique is developed to improve the beam scanning angle of the cp reflectarray, which is validated by simulation, measurement and theoretical calculated results. the present anenna design concept is flexible and can be applied to the design of dual band reflectarrays with different frequency ratios and directivity. "market forecast for connected and autonomous vehicles," centre con

i. j. bahl and d. k. trivedi, "a designer's guide to microstrip line,"

qi luo (s'08 m'12) was born in chengdu, china in 1982. he received the m.sc. degree from the uniersity of sheffield, sheffield, u.k., in 2006, and the ph.d. degree from the university of porto, porto, porugal, in 2012. from 2012 to 2013, he was a research fellow with surrey space centre, guildford, u.k. he is currently a research fellow with the school of engineering and digital arts, university of kent, canterbury, u.k. his research interests include smart antennas, circularly polarized antennas, reflectarray, multiband microstrip antennas, and electrically small antenna design. he authored/coauthored two books circularly polarized antenas (wiley ieee, 2014) and low cost smart antennas (wiley, 2019). he has been serving as a reviewer for a number of technical journals and international conferences.

steven gao (m'01 sm'16 f'19) received the ph.d. degree from shanghai university, shanghai, china. he is a professor and the chair of rf and microwave engineering, and the director of postgraduate reearch with the school of engineering and digital arts, university of kent, canterbury, u.k. he has coedited/coauthored three books including space anenna handbook (wiley, 2012), circularly polarized antennas (wiley ieee, 2014), low cost smart anennas (wiley, 2019), more than 300 papers and eight patents. his research interests include smart antenna, phased array, mimo, broadband and multiband antennas, small antennas, rf front ends, fss, and their applications into 5g mobile communications, satellite communication, small satellites, radars, energy harvesting and medical systems. he is a fellow of the royal aeronautical society and the iet. he was a disinguished lecturer of the ieee antennas and propagation society. he is an associate editor for several journals (the ieee transactions on antennas and propagation, radio science, electronics letters, ieee access, iet ciruits, devices & systems, etc.), the editor in chief for wiley book series on "microwave and wireless technologies," and an editorial board member of many international journals. he was the general chair of 2013 loughborough antenna and propagation conference, a guest editor of proceedings of the ieee for special issue on small satellites (march 2018), a guest editor of the ieee transactions on antennas and propagation for special issue on "antennas for satellite communication" (2015), and a guest editor of iet circuits, devices & systems for special issue in "photonic and rf commuications systems" (2014). he was an invited speaker in many international conferences. he was the recipient of the 2016 iet premium award for the best paper in iet microwave, antennas and propagation, and the 2017 cst univerity publication award for a paper in the ieee transactions on antennas and propagation, etc. wenting li received the b.s. degree in electronic information engineering and the m.s. degree in electromagnetic field and microwave technology from northwestern polytechnical university, xi'an, china, in 2011 and 2014, respectively. he is currently working toward the ph.d. degree with the university of kent, canterbury, u.k. his current research inerests include reflectarray antennas, reconfigurable antennas, circularly polarized antennas, and multieam antennas.

mohammed sobhy (lm'90) received the b.sc. deree in electrical engineering from the university of cairo, cairo, egypt, in 1956, and the ph.d. degree from the university of leeds, leeds, u.k., in 1966. he is an emeritus professor of electronics with the university of kent, canterbury, u.k. his current reearch interests include analysis and applications of nonlinear electronic systems.

ioanna bakaimi received the ph.d. degree from the functional nanocrystals and quantum magnetism laboratory at the iesl forth and the department of physics, university of crete, crete, greece, in 2015. she is currently a research fellow with the adanced composite materials group, chemistry deartment university of southampton, southampton, u.k. her expertise is focused in the interatomic ineractions of solid state systems and specifically in the interplay of the crystal structure with the physical properties and functionalization of magnetic, dielecric and ferroelectric oxides. her work focuses on the optimization of lead niobate pyrochlore tunable dielectric thin films for high frequency applications. she was a guest researcher in the neutron centre of national institute of stanards and technology where she carried out neutron diffraction experiments as well as crystal and magnetic structure analysis. since 2016 she is a research fellow with the advanced composite materials group, the chemistry departent, university of southampton.

c. h. kees de groot (m'00 sm'05) received the master's degree in physics from the university of groningen, groningen, the netherlands, in 1994, and the ph.d. degree from the university of amsterdam in 1998 for research carried out at the philips reearch laboratories in eindhoven, the netherlands. subsequently, he was a research fellow with the massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma, usa, where he conducted research on spin tunel junction and phase change materials. since 2000, he has been with the department of electronics and computer science, university of southampton, southampton, u.k., where he has been a full professor since 2012. he is an author of more than 125 joural publications. his main interest is the integration of novel nano materials and devices with silicon electronics processing with particular emphasis on the semiconducting and dielectric properties of oxides, chalcogenides, and carbides. his recent breakthroughs in these areas includes the first 100 nm gesbte phase change memory by non aqueous electrodeposition, sic resistive memory with a record nine orders of magnitude on/off ratio, and functional oxide nanostrucures resulting in plasmonic devices with ultrafast modulation of optical and dielectric properties of ito, azo, and vo2 by optical, electrical, and thermal methods.