optimal preamble design in spatial group based random access for satellite m2m communications

li zhen, hao qin, qian zhang, zheng chu, member, ieee, guangyue lu, jing jiang,

abstract—satellite communication is expected to play a pivotal role in supporting the ubiquitous machine to machine (m2m) connection. due to its wide beam coverage, however, one of the major challenges is to accommodate massive and concurrent m2m random access (ra) requests with the guarantee of humano human (h2h) communications. to tackle this challenge, an enhanced spatial group based random access (sgra) scheme is presented from the viewpoint of preamble design. by leveraging a large capacity ra preamble set configured with only a single root zadoff chu (zc) sequence and strictly constrained cyclic shift offset set, it can effectively eliminate non orthogonal interference (noi) and achieve the robustness to location estimation error in preamble detection procedure. simulation results demonstrate that the proposed scheme offers an outstanding detection perforance improvement, and can accommodate a significantly larger number of m2m devices while having a notably reduced collision probability and access delay, in comparison with the conventional one.

index terms—satellite, machine to machine (m2m) communi

cations, random access, spatial group, preamble design.

m achine to machine (m2m) communication, as

a promising technology of internet of things (iot), enables the interaction of machine devices without human intervention. in some cases, m2m devices are distributed over a wide area or located at remote areas unable to be served by the terrestrial cellular networks, which make the utilization of satellite be of vital importance for supporting the realization of various internet of remote things (iort) applications, such as emergency management, smart grid, and environmental monitoring . since more devices exist in the spot beam with a wider coverage range compared to the terrestrial cell, when a massive number of devices

this work was supported in part by the national natural science foundation of china under grants 61801382, 61772387 and 6187012068, in part by innovation team project of shaanxi province (2017kct 30 02), in part by the isn state key laboratory, and in part by the open fund of the shaanxi key laboratory of information communication network and security under grant icns201701. (corresponding author: hao qin, guangyue lu.)

l. zhen, g. lu and j. jiang are with the shaanxi key laboratory of information communication network and security, xian university of posts and telecommunications, xian, 710121, china (e mails: lzhen@xupt.edu.cn, tonylugy@163.com, jiangjing@xupt.edu.cn).

h. qin is with the state key laboratory of integrated services networks,

xidian university, xi'an 710071, china (e mail: hqin@mail.xidian.edu.cn).

q. zhang is with institute of telecommunication satellite, china aademy of space technology, beijing 100094, china (e mail: zhangqian19@163.com).

z. chu is with the 5g innovation center, institute of communicaion system, university of surrey, guildford gu27xh, u.k. (e mail: anrew.chuzheng7@gmail.com).

m. guizani is with dept. of computer science and engineering, qatar attempt to access the satellite simultaneously, it may result in severe preamble collisions due to the limited random access (ra) contention resources, such as ra preambles and time slots, leading to obvious performance degradation in humano human (h2h) communications. accordingly, effective ra methods are required to mitigate the collision problem for satellite m2m communications.

most of the existing collision mitigation schemes are dediated to making full use of the given ra preambles. thomsen et al. jointly utilized available ra preambles in multiple time slots to create access codewords for contention. kim et al. proposed to reuse the identical ra preambles in different regions of a cell. another feasible solution is to expand the capacity of ra preamble set to mitigate the collision, namely, spatial group based ra (sgra) , . by spatially dividing a cell into multiple regions, this scheme can reduce the size of cyclic shift offset in each root zadoff chu (zc) sequence, and consequently increase the number of available preambles generated from per root index. however, it can not be effectively applied to satellite m2m communications by considering the characteristics of satellite environments. in order to satisfy the requirements of time uncertainty and coverage performance within a beam, the preamble duration has to be lengthened on a large scale, which gives rise to noteworthy increment of detection complexity and reduction of ra opportunity per second . moreover, since the preamble sequences obtained from different root sequences are not orthogonal , the false alarm probability rises along with the number of root sequences, causing severe performance degradation for multi user access scenarios at low received signal to noise ratios (snrs).

motivated by this situation, we propose an enhanced sgra scheme for satellite m2m communications from the perspecive of optimal design of ra preamble set. first, the preamble duration is significantly reduced, by leveraging the location information of m2m device to eliminate time uncertainty. on the other hand, a single root zc sequence is employed for generating all the available preamble sequences so as to mainain orthogonality, and only uses a unique cyclic shift offset to configure each group region. it is shown that the proposed scheme can not only improve the performance of preamble detection, but also reduce the preamble collision probability and average access delay, compared to the traditional ra scheme.

ii. system description

in a multi beam satellite communication system, the covrage area is divided into a number of spot beams by using 1

fig. 1. a cell model based on spatial group in subastral beam case.

the beamforming technology. similar to the terrestrial cellular system, each spot beam can be regarded as a cell, and the satellite is the base station. as illustrated in fig. 1, we consider a cell model with respect to the subastral beam, where the coverage region with radius d is spatially divided into k groups. gk; k = 1; : : : ; k is the k th spatial group and its cambered group distance is denoted as dk. s0 is the satellite altitude, and sk is the distance between satellite and the region edge of gk. instead of utilizing k root indexes in the sgra scheme, we employ only one single root zc sequence to generate all the preambles for the beam cell, such that each group region has its particular cyclic shift offset, i.e. n k cs for gk, used to distinguish it from others.

iii. an enhanced sgra scheme for satellite m2m communications

due to the features of satellite m2m communications, a more appropriate ra method is required for improving the access efficiency and performance. to this end, we present an enhanced sgra scheme in consideration of the two facts: 1) the location information of each device can be acquired through various ranging methods, and 2) preamble sequences that obtained by means of cyclically shifting a single root sequence are mutually orthogonal. specifically, we describe the proposed scheme from the aspects of ra preamble design, preamble transmission and detection mechanism, and optimal design of group parameters.

a. ra preamble design based on spatial group in satellite environments

generally, ra preamble can be uniformly described as the time domain form in fig. 2. it can be observed that the preamble is constitutive of a cyclic prefix (cp), guard interval (gt), and a sequence (seq), and their corresponding durations can be represented as, tcp , tgt and tseq, respectively.

1) preamble duration: as is known, the preamble duration is mostly affected by the time uncertainty of a cell. it is worth mentioning that the time uncertainty, usually dependent on the user location, is defined as the difference of round trip delay (rtd) ∆trt d in satellite scenes . because of the long propagation delay and large beam coverage, the maximum value of ∆trt d can reach to be several milliseconds for the geosynchronous orbit (geo) satellite system. in this case, the 2

preamble should be extended in large timescale compared to the terrestrial one, causing significant increment of detection complexity and reduction of ra opportunity per second.

if each device is able to roughly estimate its distance from the satellite, the time uncertainty can be reformulated as ∆trt d = ∆ ¯trt d + ∆te, where ∆ ¯trt d, ∆te are estiation value and error of ∆trt d, respectively. this means the time uncertainty is nearly eliminated by the timing advance (ta) adjustment before ra preamble transmission, and conseuently the preamble duration can be effectively reduced. to be specific, the durations of cp and gt are dimensioned to cope with the time uncertainty as well as the multipath effect, and can be expressed as tcp = tgt = ∆te + (cid:28)max, where (cid:28)max is the maximum delay spread. further, tseq is achieved based on the link power budget , and also needs to satisfy tseq ≥ tcp and sub carrier spacing compatibility.

2) preamble sequence: thanks to the excellent correlation property of zc sequence, it is chosen to generate the sufcient preamble sequences, with the popular expression as xu(n) = exp[−j(cid:25)un(n + 1)=nzc] for 0 ≤ n ≤ nzc − 1, where nzc is the sequence length, and u ∈ {1; : : :; nzc − 1} is the root index. more candidate sequences can be obtained by cyclically shifting a root sequence, i.e. xu;v(n) = xu((n + vncs)modnzc) for v ∈ {1; : : : ; ⌊nzc=ncs⌋}, where ncs is the cyclic shift offset, and the number of available sequences for u is indicated as np a = ⌊nzc=ncs⌋. in the sgra the k th group gk is configured with its special scheme, root index uk and a cyclic shift offset n k cs. note that, the size of n k cs, usually relies on the group distance dk, can be effectively reduced since dk < d, so that the number of available preambles n k p a is increased. however, because the cross correlation of different root sequences is not zero, the utilization of multiple root sequences will introduce non orthogonal interference (noi) for preamble detection in the receiver. although such interference can be almost eliminated through an interference cancellation proedure , the complexity of iteration operation is hard to bear for the load limited satellite receiver. therefore, using a single root sequence to generate all the preamble sequences may be a more reasonable solution, which can radically avoid the noi and achieve an absolute interference free detection performance. motivated by this fact, we propose an enhanced spatial grouping method that each group is configured with the same root sequence and a specific cyclic shift offset selected from the set ncs = {n 1 cs : : : ; n k cs actually, since the received sequences from different groups are produced by the same root sequence, some correlation peaks may locate at the same time lags in the detection window, which results in the difficulty of distinguishing their user identities. in the case of two users access, suppose that the ta values have been compensated before ra preamble transmission, the corresponding time lags of their correlation peaks can be expressed as v1n k1 cs, respectively, where 1 ≤ v1 ≤ n k1 p a, and 1 ≤ k1; k2 ≤ k. it should be noted that, when n k1 cs are co prime and their common multiple is larger than nzc, the two peaks will not overlap in the detection window. further, to cope with the ranging error and multipath effect, the distance of two peaks }. should be larger than twice the time lags corresponding to (∆te + (cid:28)max). to summarize, the design constraints of ncs for the enhanced spatial grouping scheme are shown as follows

note that, the proposed principles make ncs become the identification of a user to differentiate it from others, rather than the traditional zero correlation zone of preamble detection . in this way, the periodical cross correlation between the given root sequence with the received signal only needs to be performed in one shot to identify all the access users. such that, the detection performance and computational load can be improved together. moreover, the extended capacity of preamble set makes the proposed scheme can accommodate more m2m devices without degrading the performance of h2h communications.

b. preamble transmission and detection mechanism

in the beam coverage area, the satellite steadily broadcasts the configuration information of ra procedure, and the sg parameters including the number of groups, k, a set of satellite terrestrial distances, s = {s1; : : : ; sk}, an exclusive index, u, and a set of cyclic shift offset, ncs = root {n 1 }. after the reception of these parameters, by leveraging the location information obtained from various ranging approaches, each device can determine its own group and acquire the corresponding value of ta. when a device in gk attempts to access the network, it will align the uplink timing in advance, and then select one of the n k p a available sequences to transmit on a ra time slot. note that, some sequences have been reserved for h2h communications and the remaining sequences are used for m2m devices.

for preamble detection in the satellite receiver, the periodcal cross correlation only needs to be calculated once, since a single root sequence is utilized. according to the design principles of the proposed preamble sequence, the correlation peaks are located at the multiple of cyclic shift offsets in ncs. compared with a predefined detection threshold rth, all the larger peaks among the detection window can be effectively captured, which clearly indicate the number of devices and their groups. besides, even in the presence of ranging error and multipath effect, the detected peaks apart lager than 2" can also be distinguished.

for m2m communications, the contention based ra proedure implies an inherent risk of collision, which will occur if two or more devices choose the same preamble to access simultaneously . let p = {p1; : : : ; pk} denote a set of collision probabilities, where pk is the collision probability in group gk, and can be expressed as pk = 1 − exp[w (ln(1 − p a)) · (cid:21) · mk · trach )] . note that, w (·) represents (1=n k table i the system parameters and values

parameters satellite altitude, s0 earth radius, r beam radius, d sequence duration, tseq sequence length, nzc root index, u number of m2m devices, m ra arrival rate, (cid:21) period of ra time slot, trach number of groups, k dstds, ∆s1, ∆s2, ∆s3

cyclic shift offsets, n 1 number of preambles, n 1

cs , n 2 p a, n 2 group distances, d1, d2, d3 area proportions, l1, l2, l3 maximum number of ra attempts backoff indicator ra processing delay cs , n 3 cs p a, n 3 p a

⌋ is the number the lambert w function, n k of available preambles in gk, and (cid:21), mk, and trach denote the ra arrival rate, the number of access devices in gk, and the period of ra time slot, respectively. p a = ⌊nzc=n k cs

to minimize the sum of collision probabilities, we formulate a joint optimization problem from the standpoint of group parameters design as follows

where lk is the area portion of gk to the beam, r and c are the earth radius and the propagation speed of the electromagnetic wave, respectively, ∆sk is the difference of satellite terrestrial distance (dstd) in gk, and tseq can be obtained based on the link power budget in . it can be observed that, this problem is actually an optimal configuration of n k cs for gk, which selects the element n k cs from the finite set of available cyclic shift offsets ncs based on the proposed principles, so as to reduce the overall collision probability. we can solve this np complete problem by utilizing a matlab optimization tool, and table i lists the ra preamble and optimum group parameters for a typical geo satellite beam in .

iv. performance evaluation

in this section, we demonstrate the performance improveent of the proposed scheme in terms of preamble detection probability at phy layer, and collision probability and access delay at mac layer by computer simulations. we perform the simulations based on the parameters listed in table i, and asume that m devices are uniformly distributed in the beam and follow an exponential distribution to access the network. note that, in the proposed scheme, 56 preambles have been reserved for h2h communications to avoid performance degradation, 3