outage performance of cognitive hybrid satellite terrestrial networks with interference constraint

kang an, min lin, wei ping zhu, senior member, ieee, yongming huang, member, ieee, and gan zheng, senior member, ieee

abstract—this paper investigates the performance of a cogitive hybrid satellite terrestrial network, where the primary satellite communication network and the secondary terrestrial mobile network coexist provided that the interference temperture constraint is satisfied. by using the meijer g functions, the exact closed form expression of the outage probability (op) for the secondary network is first derived. then, the asymptotic result in high signal to noise ratio (snr) regime is presented to reveal the diversity order and coding gain of the considered system. finally, computer simulations are carried out to confirm the theoretical results, and reveal that a looser interference constraint or a heavier shadowing severity of satellite interference link leads to a reduced outage probability, while a stronger satellite interference power poses a detrimental effect on the outage performance.

index terms—satellite terrestrial network, cognitive radio,

s atellite communication has been widely used in

various areas, such as broadcasting, disaster relief and navigation due to its potential in providing wide coverage and achieving higher data transmission rate at a low cost (see e.g., and the references therein). in this situation, many researchers have investigated the performance of satellite the communications in the open literatures. for example, authors of have analyzed the outage probability (op) and average symbol error rate (aser) of hybrid satelliteerrestrial networks, respectively, and an extended work of to the multi antenna scenarios can be found in . moreover,

is permitted. however, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be obtained from the ieee by sending a request to pubs permissions@ieee.org. this work is supported by the national natural science foundation of china under grant 61271255, the natural science foundation of jiangsu province under grant bk20131068, and the open research fund of the naional mobile communications research laboratory of southeast university under grant 2012d15. copyright (c) 2015 ieee. personal use of this material

k. an is with the college of communications engineering, pla university of science and technology, nanjing 210007, china (e mail: ankang@nuaa.edu.cn).

m. lin is with nanjing institute of telecommunication technology, naning 210007, china, and also with the national mobile communications research laboratory, southeast university, nanjing 210096, china (e mail: linmin63@163.com).

w. p. zhu is with department of electrical and computer engineering, concordia university, montreal, canada (e mail: weiping@ece.concordia.ca). y. huang is with school of information science and engineering, southeast

university, nanjing, china (e mail: huangym@seu.edu.cn).

g. zheng is with school of computer science and electronic engineering, university of essex, uk, and he is also with the interdisciplinary centre for security, reliability and trust (snt), university of luxembourg, luxembourg (e mail: ganzheng@essex.ac.uk). various performance merits of hybrid satellite terrestrial relay networks under interference limited scenarios, including op, aser, and ergodic capacity, have been investigated in . in , an opportunistic scheduling scheme in multiuser hyrid satellite terrestrial relay networks was proposed. however, the increasingly growing number of applications and services of satellite communication is rapidly exhausting the limited spectral resources, and therefore exploring new techniques to enhance spectrum efficiency in satellite communication has become an important research issue.

cognitive radio (cr) is regarded as an effective means to increase the spectral efficiency in the wireless communicaions, as it allows the secondary user (su) to coexist with the primary user (pu), provided that the interference caused by the su to pu is below predefined threshold . inspired by the benefits of cognitive radio, many standardization groups, such as european telecommunications standards institute (etsi), and researchers focused on the integration of the cr technology into satellite networks so that the efficiency of radio frequency can be enhanced . specifically, basic system model incorporating the cr techniques into satellite communications with an integrated terrestrial network has been proposed in and . this idea leads to a promising architecture, referred as cognitive hybrid satellite terrestrial network, which allows the coexistence of a satellite network with a terrestrial one operating in the same frequency band.

among the recent works, the authors in investigated the effective capacity of a cognitive satellite terrestrial netork based on the optimal power allocation scheme, and the authors in studied the carrier, power and bandwidth allocation schemes for the cognitive satellite communications with incumbent terrestrial networks. to the best knowledge of the authors, however, no other results on important perforance merits, such as outage probability, have been reported, which motivates the work presented in this paper. here, we investigate the outage performance of cognitive satellite terrestrial network with interference constraint. by using the meijer g functions, a novel closed form expression of outage probability for the considered cognitive network is derived, which can be used to characterize the impact of various system parameters, such as the interference temperature constraint, fading severity of the su link, and shadowing severity of the satellite interference link on the performance of the considred network. furthermore, the asymptotic yet simple results at high snr are also presented for both the proportional interference constraint and the peak interference constraint, which reveals two important performance merits, namely the 1

fig. 1: system model of a cognitive satellite terrestrial network

achievable diversity order and coding gain of the cognitive satellite terrestrial network.

notations: e [·] denotes the expectation operator, |·| the absolute value, min (a, b) the minimum value of a and b, exp (·) the exponential function, nc(m, σ2) the complex gaussian distribution with mean m and variance σ2.

as depicted in fig. 1, we consider a cognitive hybrid satelite terrestrial network, where the terrestrial mobile network acts as the secondary system and shares the same spectral resource with the satellite communication network, termed as primary system, to improve the efficiency of the radio spectrum. assuming that all of the nodes are equipped with a single antenna, the received signal of the terrestrial user, namely, su, can be expressed as (cid:112)

where ps and pp denote, respectively, the transmit power at the base station (bs) and that at the satellite with x (t) and = 1 s (t) being the corresponding signals obeying e

= 1. in addition, hss is the channel coefficient and e from base station to the secondary user, and gps is the channel coefficient of the interference link from the satellite to the represents the secondary user. meanwhile, n (t) ∼ nc zero mean additive white gaussian noise (awgn) at su.

to prevent the pu from being interfered beyond an intererence constraint q, the transmit power at bs should satisfy

where pt denotes the maximum available transmit power at the bs, and hsp is the channel coefficient between the base station and the primary user. after some algebraic manipulations, the end to end signal to interference plus noise ratio (sinr) at su can be written as 2

σ2 denote the average

generally speaking, satellite links are usually modeled as composite fading distributions to describe more accurately the amplitude fluctuation of the signal envelope. although some mathematical models, such as those of loo, barts stutzman, and karasawa et al., have been developed to describe the satellite channel, the shadowed rician model proposed in is a popular one, which provides a significantly less computaional burden than other channel models. the fading channel of the satellite links can be modeled as gk = ¯gk + j˜gk, j2 = −1 , where the line of sight (los) component ¯gk can be described as an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) nakagami m random variable (rv), and the element of scattering component ˜gk follows an i.i.d complex gaussian the probability distribution with zero mean. consequently, density function (pdf) of yk = |gk|2 is given by , (cid:179) (cid:180)

similar to ,,, we suppose that the terrestrial links, namely hss and hsp, undergo nakagami m fading distribution. (cid:180) i ∆= ss, sp thus, xi = |hi|2 to the gamma distribution, whose pdf is given by , (cid:179)

where γ (·) is the gamma function [20, eq. (8.310.1)], and εi = mi/ωi with mi and ωi being the fading severity parameter and the average power, respectively.

in the following sections, based on the above mentioned statistical properties of the fading links, we will analyze the op of the secondary network by deriving some useful expressions.

iii. outage probability analysis

in wireless systems, the outage probability is an important quality of service (qos) performance measure, which is dened as the probability that the output instantaneous sinr γd falls below an acceptable threshold γth, namely,

where fγd (cdf). with the help of (3), fγd (x) denotes the cumulative distributed function

(x) can be written as

0 (7) σ2. as for any random variables where ¯γq = q a and b, we have min(a,b)=a if b ≥ a and min(a,b)=a if b ≤ a. therefore, the cdf of ¯γsxss can be expressed as the sum of the following probabilities,

then, invoking again the concepts of conditional probability theory , f¯γsxss

(x) is the cdf of xss, which can be obtained by 3

where γ (·, ·) is the lower incomplete gamma function [20, eq. (8.350.1)].then, by using (5) and (11) along wiht some algebraic computations, i1 and i2 in (10) can be computed as

in a closed form as shown in the following theorem.

proof. see appendix a.

eventually, by replacing x with γth in (15), it is straightforard to calculate the op of the considered cognitive network.

     ,  (15) remark 1. note that the meijer g function of single variable can be efficiently calculated by many popular computing softares, such as matlab and mathematic. further, the meijer functions of two variables can be alternatively computed using an efficient approach as proposed in [23, table ii]. as a conclusion, our analytical expression provides an efficient method to evaluate the op of the considered network with a low computational complexity.

iv. asymptotic outage probability at high snr

in this section, we study the asymptotic op of the cognitive network and thereby reveal two important performance merits: diversity order and coding gain. herein, we consider two interference constraint, practical scenarios: a) proportional and b) peak interference constraint.

as for the proportional interference constraint scenario, the interference temperature constraint q at pu is proportional to the maximum available transmit power ¯γt at bs, i.e., ¯γq = µ¯γt with µ being the positive constant, which means that pu can tolerate a large power interference signal. in what follows, we will present the asymptotic outage probability of the secondary terrestrial network as theorem 2.

theorem 2. the asymptotic op at high snr with proportional interference constraint can be expressed as (cid:182)mss

according to the results reported in , we express the asymptotic op expression in (16) into a general form with respective to the diversity order gd and coding gain gc, namely

based on (18), one can directly observe the two performance metrics, namely, the diversity order gd and coding gain gc of the considered cognitive network, as gd = mss and gc = υ−m−1 table i: lms channel parameters

b. peak interference constraint

besides the proportional interference constraint, we consider the peak interference constraint scenario, where q is fixed and only pt becomes large in the high snr regime. the asymptotic behaviors of the secondary terrestrial network in this case is presented as theorem 3 below.

theorem 3. the asymptotic op in high snr regime with peak interference constraint can be derived as (cid:181) (cid:181)

for the peak interference constraint, it is worth noting that the op performance becomes saturated in high snr regime ¯γt, which means only zero diversity can be achieved. this is because the interference temperature constraint q becomes a dominant factor to determine the maximum available transmit power at bs as shown in (2) in the case of pt → ∞.

v. numerical results

this section provides numerical results to validate the theoetical analysis and show the effects of key parameters on the system outage performance. here, the simulation results are obtained by performing 107 channel realizations, with different shadowing scenarios of the satellite links (gps, gpp), including frequent heavy shadowing (fhs), average shadowing (as) and infrequent light shadowing (ils) being given in table i . in the simulations, we set γth = 3 db, ωss = ωsp = 1 and the noise variance σ2 = 1.

first of all, we focus on scenarios a), namely, proportional interference constraint. fig. 2 plots the exact and asymptotic op curves of the secondary terrestrial system for different 4

satellite interference powers (i.e., pp). as shown in the figure, the analytical results calculated by (15) agree well with the monte carlo simulation results, validating our theoretical derivations. meanwhile, the outage performance significantly improves with the increase of mss, which reveals that the outage performance is closely related to the channel qualty of the secondary transmission link hss. moreover, the diversity order of mss can be achieved for the proportional interference constraint, which confirms our findings in the asymptotic analysis. although the satellite interference power does not affect the system diversity order, it degrades the system performance by reducing the coding gain. fig. 3 shows the impact of terrestrial interference link quality (i.e. mps) on the op of secondary network. interestingly, the system performance with good terrestrial interference link quality (i.e., large msp) is superior to that of bad terrestrial interference link quality (i.e., small msp). this phenomenon reveals that the more deterministic the terrestrial interference link is, the better outage performance can be achieved. it can also be oberved that the outage performance improvement due to better interference links becomes much more prominent when the channel parameter of the su link (i.e., hss) improves from 1 to 3, which indicates that the impact of terrestrial interference link quality on the system performance is intimately related to the channel quality of the su link.

now, we consider scenario b), namely, peak interference constraint. the effect of different interference temperature constraints q on the outage probability of secondary terestrial network is shown in fig. 4. here, we consider q = −∞, 10, 15, 20 db, where the case of no interference temperature constraint denoted as q = −∞ is provided as a benchmark for comparison. as observed, the outage probability of the system under an interference temperature constraint is generally inferior to that of the system with no 5

fig. 3: impact of fading severity of terrestrial interference link (i.e., msp) on the outage probability of secondary network under proportional interference constraint: hps experiencing fhs, pp = 5 db and ¯γq = ¯γt

interference temperature constraint. also, due to the existence of interference temperature constraint, the outage probability of the system becomes saturated, and the system diversity is reduced from mss to zero. moreover, as the interference temperature constraint becomes loose, i.e., q gets larger, the outage error floor reduces, and the outage performance of the system improves. fig. 5 plots the impact of terrestrial interference link quality (i.e. mps) on the outage performance of secondary network. similar to scenario a), we can find that the impact of the terrestrial interference link quality on the performance of secondary network heavily relies on the su link.

finally, fig. 6 compares the outage performance of the secondary network for different shadowing severity of satellite interference link (i.e. (bps, mps, ωps)) between scenario a) and scenario b). as seen in the figure, for both scenarios, the comparison among fhs, as and ils curves shows that the cases experiencing heavier shadowing severity result in a reduced outage probability. this is because heavier shadowing severity corresponds to a weaker satellite interference link. moreover, it is found that the peak interference constraint is a little better than the proportional interference constraint in low and medium snr regimes. however, due to outage error floor where only zero diversity order can be achieved, the proportional interference constraint is significantly superior to the peak interference constraint at high snr.

in this paper, we have investigated the outage performance of a novel cognitive satellite terrestrial network with interfernce temperature constraint, where the satellite system acts as the primary network while the terrestrial system serves as the secondary network. both the exact and asymptotic 10 0 30 10−3 10−1 35 10−4 100 10−2 25 40 15 ¯γt(db)outageprobability q=10dbq=15dbq=20dbq=−∞db(nointerferenceconstraint) 5 20 10−6 10 0 30 10−3 10−1 35 10−4 100 10−2 25 40 15 5 20 10−5 fig. 4: outage probability of the secondary network for different interference temperature constraints q under peak interference constraint: mss = msp = 1, hps experiencing fhs and pp = 5 db

expressions for the op of the considered cognitive system have been derived in a closed from, whose validity has been confirmed by monte carlo simulations. the proposed novel expression contains finite number of summation of the genralized meijer g functions, which can evaluate the system performance with a high computational efficiency. our finding shows that whether the fading severity of su link affects the diversity order of the terrestrial cognitive system depends on the interference temperature constraint at pu. particularly, under a peak interference constraint, the op becomes saturated and no diversity order can be achieved. furthermore, a heavier shadowing severity of the satellite interference link results in a reduced outage probability. since the associated performance analysis of cognitive systems is a key research area in practical wireless communication networks, our technical contribution is of particular importance to the engineers working for the system design and performance evaluation. some interest 6

ing extensions of our work, including the multiple antenna scenarios or the incorporation of relay transmission, will be considered as the subject of our future research.

(x) in (5) into (7) along with binomial expansion, fγd (x) can be expressed as (22), where ξ = εss¯γpx/¯γt +βps, θ = εss¯γpx/¯γq +εsp and η=k+msp −n. since the integrals i3 and i4 in (22) can not be directly evaluated in their current form, we propose a meijer function based mathematic methodology in the following derivation. by substituting f¯γsxss

proportional interference constraint can be expressed as

hence, in order to obtain (27), we first need to obtain the asymptotic cdf of xss. since the asymptotic results only depend on the high order terms , i.e., ¯γt → ∞, we apply a series representation of the incomplete gamma function [20, eq. (8.354.1)] as

(x) in (11), and obtain its asymptotic form as

then, substituting (30) and (31) into (27) and performing necessary manipulations, we have

finally, by replacing x in (33) with γth, the asymptotic op can be obtained as (16). by using (10), the asymptotic cdf of ¯γsxss for peak

in a manner similar to obtaining (30) and (31), be, respectively, computed as

by substituting (36) into (7) in conjunction with [20, eq. (7.813.1)], the f ∞ (x) for the peak interference constraint can γd be calculated as (cid:34)

obviously, one can directly obtain the asymptotic op by replacing x in (37) with γth. v. sakarellos, c. kourogiorgas and a. panagopoulos, "cooperative hybrid land mobile satellite terrestrial broadcasting systems: outage probability evaluation and accurate simulation", wireless personal comunications, to be published.

s. k. sharma, s. chatzinotas, and b. ottersten, "satellite cognitive interference modeling and techniques selection," in

s. k. sharma, s. chatzinotas, and b. ottersten , "cognitive radio techniques for satellite communication systems," in proc. 2013 ieee vehicular technology conference, pp. 1 5.

i. s. gradshteyn and i. m. ryzhik, table of integrals, series, and

a. papoulis, probability, random variables, and stochastic processes.

v. s. adamchik, o. i. marichev, "the algorithm for calculating integrals of hypergeometric type functions and its realization in reduce systems," in proc. int. conf. symp. algebraic comput., 1990, pp. 212 224. 8