passive maritime surveillance using satellite communication signals

andrew g. stove, senior member, ieee, marina s. gashinova, stanislav hristov and mikhail cherniakov

 abstract— in this paper the feasibility of a bistatic passive system for maritime surveillance and marine navigation is considered based on the communication satellite constellation inmarsat as a source of illuminating signals. a power budget analysis is detailed for inmarsat signals, considering both the reference and the radar channels. the effect of sea clutter is also examined. it is shown that relatively poor range resolution can be improved if the available communication channels are combined to improve the bandwidth, a process which also improves the sensitivity. for the first time detection and preliminary bistatic range doppler tracking are presented for a representative maritime target.

index terms—passive radar, radar detection, radar tracking, radar clutter, satellite communications, marine navigation

he last decade has seen a surge of passive radar research, using a wide variety of potential illuminators . passive radar systems have been proposed for the detection and tracking of ground, maritime or airborne targets, in most cases using terrestrial broadcasting signals . passive systems represent an alternative way to provide large area surveillance with persistent monitoring with a low environment impact and low cost without incurring the overheads and delays needed to introduce a new 'primary' system. the choice of terrestrial broadcasting systems as illuminators of opportunity (ioo's) is dictated by their accessibility, large transmitted powers, excellent coverage at least in populated areas and reasonably large bandwidth providing acceptable range resolution, making them a perfect candidate for ubiquitous surveillance network.

the potential limited earth coverage and vulnerability of terrestrial broadcasters in situation of manade or natural disasters limit their universality and reliability and therefore reduce their attractiveness of such systems for

this work was supported by the cde, dstl, uk under grant cde

a. g. stove, m. s. gashinova, s. hristov and m. cherniakov are with the department of electrical, electronic and systems engineering at the university of birmingham, edgbaston, birmingham, b15 2tt, u.k. (e mail: {a.stove, m.gashinova, sxh909, m.cherniakov}@bham.ac.uk). pervasive surveillance.

instead spaceborne ioo's may help to tackle such

in military applications, its passive nature will make interception and electronic attack much harder or even impractical. at shorter ranges the effects of glint on the tracking accuracy will be reduced because: (i) the bistatic radar cross section (rcs) is not so affected as the monostatic rcs by specular reflectors and (ii) presumably lower operational frequencies of transmitters of opportunity than that of traditional dedicated system. therefore, there is a need to analyze the suitability of available systems and to discuss the optimum tradeoff of parameters which can deliver the required performance.

the goal of this work is therefore to investigate the performance of bistatic passive system for detection and kinematic parameters estimation of maritime targets.

ii. analysis of prospective transmitters of opportunity

to provide the required sensitivity for detecting targets of interest, the prospective ioo should be considered in terms of:

transmit power carrier frequency illuminating signal bandwidth number of the transmitters visible simultaneously

for the complete system design, there are, of course, also

other parameters which are important:

spatial availability knowledge of transmitter position availability over time (pervasiveness) ownership of the transmitters vulnerability of the transmitter

the significance of these factors will be made clear below.

a. factors influencing detection performance 1) transmit power the power flux density produced by the transmitter in areas of interest must be adequate to provide the required snr at the receiver for the signals reflected from the targets of interest at the distances defined by the application.

2) carrier frequency the transmit signal carrier frequency is a relatively soft requirement, though certain aspects need to be considered.: independent ioo utilization of signals operating within the same rf band will lead to the simplicity of multifunctional receiver which can provide multi aspect observation, more accurate positioning and higher reliability of the system. this favors l band operation, with the additional advantage of lower atmospheric attenuation and fading in comparison with high frequency signals, such as ka band.

3) illuminating signal bandwidth the bandwidth of the signals defines the radar range resolution, a parameter which defines the system performance in multi target scenarios and reduces its sensitivity to surface or volume clutter;

4) number of the transmitters visible simultaneously the reliability of the system is totally dependent on the availability of the ioo and, obviously, the more transmitters which are simultaneously visible the less is the chance of system failure due to signal outage. in addition, in bistatic systems the care should be taken to avoid unfavorable bistatic geometries, such as forward scatter, and, therefore, spatial diversity of multiple ioos provides the opportunity to choose the best configuration. moreover, powers from several transmitters could be at least non coherently combined to improve the system performance. b. factors affecting system performance 1) spatial availability the 'spatial availability' is a way of expressing which areas are covered by the transmitter. for maritime surveillance global coverage is needed, though this requirement can be relaxed to exclude areas around the geographical poles. in this respect gnss systems and the communications systems in geostationary earth orbit (geo) give global coverage up to latitudes of about 80⁰, whereas

while gnss satellites provide global coverage their power flux density (pfd) at the earth is about 30 40 db less than that of communication satellites . combination of signals may broadcast transmitters are only designed to give coverage over land and littoral regions, not over the open sea.

2) knowledge of transmitter position the position in space of the transmitter must be well characterized in order to be able to estimate the target position and velocity.

3) availability over time (pervasiveness) the temporal availability characterizes the proportion of time for which a suitable ioo is present. the signal of opportunity is required to be available at any time, day or night, on any day.

4) ownership of the transmitters transmitters which are owned by commercial organization or by national governments may be switched off or their the signal's parameters changed, which may degrade suitability as an ioo. this may be done deliberately to disrupt a pcl system 'hitchhiking' on it. this factor is this directly related to the system reliability and pervasiveness. ideally transmitters would belong to international organization or allies' defense or national institutions. this would prevent global denying access to the signals.

5) vulnerability of the transmitter a transmitter which is vulnerable in the event of man made or natural catastrophes would not be suitable for a reliable, pervasive system. space borne systems are very robust to the broadcasting events on organizations also take a lot of effort to ensure that their transmission infrastructure is very robust. target detection, satellite based transmitters could be viewed as the most suitable. significant emitters are the inmarsat i 4 and iridium communication satellites and the uprated gps and the galileo satellite navigation systems. from the perspective of the 'system' issues, all three emitter types are suitable.

khz inmarsat medium channel) (per potentially could be combined till high

≈1 2 covering any geographical region

improve the power budget. to work as a navigation system, a gnss system must provide at least four satellites in sight at any time. in practice there will typical be six in sight. the rule of thumb given in section iii.g indicates that incoherent integration of these multiple signals will give an extra gain of about 6 db. this extra gain is not, however, sufficient to overcome the problems of the limited flux density, so, in spite of the attractive bandwidth and spatial/temporal availability, current accessible gnss signals are not suitable for remote detection of marine targets.

in its turn the communication satellites with allegedly global or near global coverage, such as inmarsat and iridium may provide satisfactory power flux density, but they are less attractive in terms of the bandwidth and pervasiveness and, therefore, the research should be focused on development of approaches to improve resolution and to investigate if multimode operation, i.e. various combinations of different the system ioo, services, channels etc., can enhance performance.

it is noticeable that inmarsat 4 and iridium provide similar 'headline' power densities of 66 dbm/m2 and 70 dbm/m2 at the earth's surface, respectively, despite their very different orbital heights about 36,000 km (geo) for inmarsat and 780 km for iridium (leo) because they both need sufficient power density to send down useful data rates into receivers with modest antenna apertures. the wider bandwidth of inmarsat is matched by the fact that its receivers use antennas with an area typically of the order of 0.1 m2 whereas those used by iridium, with its lower data rate, appear to be essentially monopoles.

both of these systems operate in 'l' band. the systems operate at slightly different frequencies, but the difference between them is, again, not significant given the other approximations within the modelling, so all the modelling can use the same nominal frequency of 1.5 ghz (20 cm wavelength).

c. flux density available from the inmarsat system

it should be noted that although quotes a flux density of 64 dbm/m2 at the earth's surface, this is based on a slightly misleading definition of the effective radiated power. states that the total eirp of the satellite is 67dbw, but this is the total emitted power multiplied by the gain of each 'spot' beam. the space to ground links use the spectrum between the system has 1525 mhz and 1559 mhz is compatible with approximately 120 channels. this statement in that the saturation power per link per beam is 55 dbw. this would give a flux density of about 78 dbm/m2 at the earth's surface.

a single spot on the earth can, however, be illuminated by a number of beams, allowing a number of ground stations in the same region to use the system simultaneously. each geographical region sees only about one seventh of these channels (i.e. up to about 17 channels) because a degree of frequency diversity is used to prevent different signals from using the same channel at the edge of a 'spot.' this means that whilst a radar could potentially use the power from 17 channels, giving a total potential flux density of about 66 dbm/m2, in practice, as will be shown later, the system will generally see only about four channels operating at maximum power.

it can therefore be seen that for marine applications, which require illumination over the open sea and a relatively high power density, to obtain good detection range, satellite communications systems seem one of the most promising illuminators of opportunity and well worth further investigation, in particular to quantify and verify the expected sensitivity.

in the next section we start with the analysis of the power

budget for inmarsat transmitters and typical targets.

iii. power budget analysis

fig. 1 shows the general topology of the system where the double channel receiver, which is mounted on either low altitude or seaborne platform, is used to collect reflected signals from a vessel coherently with reference signal or synchronization signal from a satellite.

a. maritime obstacle avoidance

although the primary intention of this paper is to introduce the general concept of passive maritime radar using satellite communication signals, it is useful to focus on one specific application when discussing the power budget.

this concept could have many potential applications, both civil and military we will consider here a simple marine collision avoidance system. this is a lessapable alternative to a navigation radar which would look ahead of a small ship to warn specifically of objects in its path, in a function more akin to an automotive radar than to a conventional marine radar. a low cost radar with this capability would be an attractive sensor for small autonomous boats. it would be appropriate as a 'baseline' performance for such a system to consider the earlier generation international maritime organization requirement for marine radars , i.e. the ability to detect a target with a radar cross section of 10 m2 at a height of 3.5 m above the sea and at range of 2 nautical miles. although

the experimental results which will be presented in section v were obtained with the radar on the shore, to avoid the need, for these first experiments, to build hardware which could cope with the marine environment. the results shown are therefore more to a shore based harbor surveillance radar. note, however, that many such systems are in fact based on marine navigation radars so the results are still able to verify the calculations made here using marine obstacle avoidance as our 'straw man' application for the initial exploration of the capabilities of the system.

b. scenario the bistatic scattering from a target of approximately 10 m2 rcs will thus be considered in the sensitivity evaluations as a reference model for radar channel signal estimations, while for the synchronization channel the free space propagation model will be used. fig. 1. passive target detection by pcl consisting of low altitude receiver and spaceborne transmitter.

the inmarsat 4 system will be considered as the illuminator and the signal is considered to consist of four frequency channels each with a bandwidth of 200 khz and a flux density of 78 dbm/m2.

the presence of the sea surface in the scenario will give rise both to returns from the sea clutter and also to multipath interference which will affect the strength of the return from the target.

c. propagation models for estimation of received power

1) 'rough surface' limit the simplest case for modelling occurs in high sea states at the relatively short ranges, where the multipath will not have such a strong effect because the scattering from the sea surface will cease to be specular. in that case a free space propagation model can be applied for estimation of the received power along the path from the target to the receiver:

near the target produced by a satellite, pfd, and the target bistatic radar cross section σ, d is the receiver to target range and arx is the effective area of the receive antenna.

2) 'two ray' limit on the other hand, at low sea states when the sea can be treated as being smooth, the reflection from the sea can be considered to be perfect and the two ray propagation model can be used predicting rapid attenuation of the signal proportional to the fourth power of distance: 22,target244trxdhhrxtrxmultipathrxpahhpd

where λ is the wavelength of the transmitted signal, ht and hrx are the height of the target and the elevation of the receiver, respectively.

when the path difference between the direct and indirect paths is relatively small, the received power will oscillate with range around that predicted by the free space model according to

3) desirability of a comprehensive model although it is possible to model the performance using the two limiting cases considered above, it is actually better to create a more comprehensive model which can calculate the effects of the multipath in any geometry and any conditions of sea state and signal polarization and can automatically take these into account. this means that the modeler does not have to make a judgement at each stage as to which limiting the actual scenario. the condition best approximates modelling used to predict the performance of the system proposed here therefore automatically took account of the roughness of the sea and of the variation of the effective reflection coefficient with grazing angle and polarization . it also uses a 'spherical' earth model for the sea surface when finding the reflection point of the rays. as soon as the wave heights (expressed by the douglas sea state ) becomes significant, the backscatter from the sea also becomes significant. the power scattered from the sea surface and received by the radar is given by:

where pfd, is again the power flux density in the vicinity of a target area, acell is the footprint of the sea surface reflecting into a single receiver resolution cell and σ0 is the rcs per unit area of the sea surface area, which depends on the sea state, the grazing angle and the frequency and polarization of the radar signals.

the resolution cell area acell can be approximated as:

transmitted signal is bandwidth, c is the speed of light and δθ is the angular resolution expressed in radians, which can be approximated by the one way 3 db beamwidth of the receiver antenna. the range resolution, bsig is the

e. signal to noise

the most general way to calculate the sensitivity of the radar is to use the mean power level of the signals, which is in accord with the consequence of the matched filter theorem that the sensitivity of radar is determined by its mean power rather than its peak power. this approach avoids the need to consider pulse compression gain or any details of the waveform (such as its bandwidth) in the calculations. the received signal level is then compared to the noise floor to (3)

(6) determine the sensitivity of the radar. the most appropriate bandwidth to use when determining the sensitivity is the data rate at which the radar must pass information to whatever system is to use that information, since this limits the possible integration time. this is equivalent to the approach used to determine the 'surveillance radar range equation' .

at its most basic this approach therefore determines the sensitivity based on the energy received from the target (mean power times integration time, which is equivalent to mean power divided by bandwidth). the basic equation according to this scheme gives the best attainable performance because it assumes perfect integration of the received signals. losses due to practical as mismatching of the filtering to reduce sidelobes or the need to use incoherent integration and other losses due to other imperfections in the system can then be incorporated as required.

(7) where kt is the product of boltzmann's constant and the temperature, nr is the receiver noise factor and b is now the reciprocal of the integration time.

it is important to distinguish between the signal bandwidth

if we do not need to consider noise from external sources, such as atmospheric noise, using and (7) the free space the signal to noise (snr) ratio is then:

the final calculation of the radar performance needs to take into account the effects of clutter as well as noise. by comparing the cnr and the snr it becomes easy to identify the two limiting cases, the first when the clutter is negligible and the sensitivity is limited by the receiver noise and the other where the clutter is dominant.

there is relatively little data on the specific rcs of sea clutter in bistatic geometries. the data suggests that the bistatic values are on average slightly lower than the monostatic, but the differences are small and in view of the lack of data, the modelling performed here uses monostatic values, although these may be slightly conservative.

in practical calculations, discussed in the next section, we will use values for σ0 based largely on the experimentally measured values tabulated in . several attempts have been made to parameterize this data set in order to refine the estimates at the spot frequencies and a smoothing scheme is being used in our calculations which was created at the royal radar establishment, as it then was, in the u.k. this work of parameterizing the values is described in . similar parameters to those described in reference of x band also exist for the l band frequencies used here. using this is probably parameterization conservative since this model predicts significantly higher levels of backscatter at low grazing angles than do some other models such as that described in . is another decision which

the experimental data values in exist for specific (integral) values of the sea state, for specific (nominal) frequencies and specific grazing angles and the software interpolates between these values.

data exists for horizontal and vertical polarizations. very little actual data exists for circular polarization, even for monostatic scenarios. the general assumption is that the values for circular polarization are the 'average' of those for the two linear polarizations. in fact, such an assumption, particularly when applied equally to both cond crossircular polarizations, implies some unlikely relative phase behavior between the different linearly polarized components. this modelling therefore used the vertically polarized data as a worst case, i.e. once again it took a conservative approach.

as explained above, the receiver bandwidth is assumed to be the reciprocal of the data update rate, which may be of the order of 24/minute for a marine radar, giving an integration time of 2.5 seconds.

where multiple transmitters are available, the effective power density has been used based on the assumption that the signals can be integrated together incoherently. in typical curves for incoherent integration gain can be found. many authors agree that for the radar case, with relatively high signal to noise ratios and relatively small numbers of these curves can be ( 1000), uncorrelated samples parameterized by a gain of nk, where n is the number of samples and the exponent, k, is less than 1. for the modelling shown here the parametrization is n3/4, which the authors believe to be the best model. in this case, therefore if n equalower transmitters are available, each of power density p0 at the target, the total effective power density can be taken as p0n3/4. with four effective samples integrated the gain will thus be about 5 db rather than the ideal value of 6 db. the effective flux density will be 73 dbm/m2.

combining four channels which are close together and each of which have a bandwidth of 200 khz will typically give a system bandwidth of 0.8 mhz so the radial length of the clutter cell can be taken to be 188 m.

in order to find the difference in the lengths of the direct and indirect paths, the multipath model has to find the point where the multipath ray over a spherical earth is reflected from the sea surface. this is done by an iterative method. the multipath model is applied to the signal scattered from the target to the receiver. it is assumed that the elevation angle of the transmitter from the target will be high enough that the effects of multipath on the signal travelling from the transmitter to the target can be ignored.

a value of 2 db may be taken for the noise figure. this is the same as that obtained for the experimental receiver the receiver aperture will be taken as 8 dbm2. this corresponds to a pencil beam with a width of about 26⁰, which is appropriate to give a wide enough field of view to see objects which might pose a hazard to the boat. a relatively wide elevation beamwidth is needed to accommodate pitching of the boat.

fig. 2 shows signal to noise ratio (snr), the red line, and

the curves show the total sea clutter return. if operation is required in sea state 5 it should be noted that the signal to clutter ratio can be improved by at least 10 db by coherent processing since the clutter will be spread over about 20 hz spectral width but the target will be concentrated in a single velocity bin. the motion of the boat will also further spread the clutter spectrum due to doppler beam sharpening so a useable signal to clutter ratio should also be obtainable even in this sea state.

fig. 3 shows the corresponding data for the opposite extreme, sea state 0. here, as expected, the clutter levels are very low and the performance is noise limited. although the general performance is much better, there are deep nulls at

fig. 2. signal to noise (solid red) and clutter to noise (dotted blue) for 10 square meter target at 3.5m height in sea state 5.

fig. 3. signal to noise (upper curve) and clutter to noise (lower curve) for 10 square meter target at 3.5 m height in sea state 0.

shorter ranges due to the effects of multipath. these effects are much more severe with the lower sea state because the reflections are more coherent and hence the cancellation at the multipath nulls is deeper.

for completeness, fig. 4 shows the behavior in the

intermediate case of sea state 3.

iv. verification of the sensitivity calculations

a measurement campaign was to confirm the power budgets was undertaken. as this took place within the united kingdom it used the alphasat (inmarsat 4a f4 25 e) satellite as the emitter. it also used coherent combination of four signal channels to provide an overall signal bandwidth of 0.8mhz which reduced the size of the clutter patch, and hence improved the clutter levels compared to those assumed in the calculations for the final system. the trials used to confirm the sensitivity calculations were conducted during summer autumn of 2015 with the radar at constitution hill, aberystwyth, wales, uk (52⁰25'30.78"n, 4⁰0.5'02.26"w). the receiver site was 100 m above sea level.

(a) fig. 5. (a) google earth photo with marked location of the receiving equipment, radar and sync antennas directions and boat tracks during the experiments, recorded through its on board gps logger; (b) target (c) receiver antennas

a google earth photograph of the site, radar configuration and trajectories of a target recorded by gps logger are shown in fig.5.

during trials the boat, which was 10.5 m long, (fig.5b) was used as a co operative target. its displacement is 9.5 tons, and using a common rule of thumb equating the rcs in square meters to the displacement in tons , certainly at moderate grazing angles we would expect that the monostatic rcs of the boat is about 10 dbm2. the boat was moving with two speeds: 'high' of 9 10 knots when moving with the seas and 'low' of about 6 knots when moving against seas.

a medium specification gps data logger of 1 s update rate

was onboard the boat to record its positions and velocities.

two boat trajectories were of particular interest to establish measured range and doppler resolution: normal to and parallel to the line of sight to the radar antenna.

the sea state could be estimated from the weather buoy data which can be downloaded from the internet . the nearest buoy was just off aberporth, about 25 miles down the coast. during the period of the trials the wind speed was between 10 kts and 11 kts, approximately from the north. the wave height was between about 2 and 2.5 ft. this corresponds to a douglas sea state on the border between sea state 2 and sea state 3.

due to relatively high sea state boat trajectories were chosen to be not exactly parallel or perpendicular to the coast line, but at an angle as shown in fig. 5a. the course had to be adjusted according to wind and wave direction and severity. the sync antenna was invariably directed to the satellite which has an elevation of about 26⁰ above the horizon and with radar antenna looking into the sea they defined nearly monostatic geometry of satellite targeteceiver and nearly ideal radial direction of the boat moving along trajectories 70 shown in fig. 5a.

the receiver was based on ni usrp (universal software radio peripheral) type usrp 2950r. the settings of the usrp and parameters used for signal acquisition are shown in table ii.

the overall noise figure of the radar receiver channel is

fig. 6 shows set of several consecutive range doppler frames as well as amplitude range doppler (ard) surfaces of total 120 secs record of the boat moving along the trajectory 9 (fig.5a). the frames here are defined as range doppler maps of sections of signal starting at consecutive times were integrated over 1 s coherently and then over 10 sec nonime' coherently. the conventional processing and 'bands stitching' procedures were used as described in [3, 20]. as reported in examination of the characteristics of the signals suggests that it is routinely possible to find groups of adjacent, or nearly adjacent channels which can be combined in this way. 'long integration

in each frame there is an area of elevated signal amplitudes

within positive doppler bins encompassing 0 20 hz which

usrp reference frequency source usrp lna gain usrp acquisition centre frequency usrp i/q sampling rate antenna

front end lna table ii receiver parameters sync channel radar channel

relates to an inshore sea clutter. indeed, in case of incoming seas to the coast (as for data collected) it produces positive doppler shift around of 10 hz as well defined swells travel with a speed of around of 1 m/s. there will be some outward weaker backward waves after bouncing to the shore which rapidly attenuates, so that close to the shoreline the doppler shift is expected to have a small component with the opposite sign which again explain the spread in negative doppler domain area. the strongest sea reflections are visible at short range which is a minimum range of antenna beam footprint on the sea surface, i.e. at the second range cell from the receiver. then it extends along the range with appropriate reduction of reflected power with the distance.

the reflection from a boat is seen as a blob (in dashed circle) appearing in consecutive range resolution cells in successive frames and around 40 hz doppler, which would be the nearly monostatic doppler shift corresponding to a target outward radial speed of 5 m/s. progression of the boat in cells for series frames (table iii) indicates agreement with the speed estimated from doppler shift as over each 30 secs it passes into the next resolution cell. the boat gps data confirms these results and correspondingly confirms that the

v. comparison of theory and experiment

although the target in the experimental scenario was at relatively short range and the radar height was significantly higher than for the proposed applications, the same modelling tools are applicable to both environments so the experimental data can be used to validate the modelling discussed in section iii. fig 7 shows the predicted performance of the radar. boat has been correctly identified in the range doppler plots.

table iii target position versus time

fig. 7. signal to noise (upper curve) and clutter to noise (lower curve) for 10 square meter target in sea state 3 100 m radar altitude.

it can be seen that in this geometry the signal to clutter ratio is quite poor at short ranges due to the high depression angle. the expected signal to noise ratio for this scenario, with the target at 500 m range is 33 db. this is lower than might be expected from the data in fig. 2 to 4 because the integration time in the experiments was only one second. the modelling predicts that the clutter to noise ratio in this scenario would be 1db.

from fig. 6, the background level is about 40 db and the signal level is about 5 db above this. the target is, however spread over about 10 hz in doppler which implies that the total power received from it is 10 db higher than that seen in a single doppler bin, so the signal to background ratio for an equivalent point target, where all the energy would be concentrated into a single range doppler bin, would be about 15 db. in fact, the background level is about 9 db above the noise floor because it is dominated by the sidelobes from close in targets. this effect could easily be reduced in a real system by partially nulling the direct signal. the signal to noise ratio for an equivalent point target would thus be 24 db. the expected and observed sensitivity is best attributed to the fact that the bistatic rcs of a man made target will be expected to be lower than the monostatic value because of the major contribution which corner reflectors make to the monostatic rcs. no similar structures, which would have to produce strong scattering from transmitter to receiver over a wide range of geometries, can be expected in the general bistatic case. the reduction of 9 db (i.e. a bistatic rcs of about 1.2 m2 compared to an expected monostatic rcs of 10 m2) is very significant, but not implausible. the simulations of bistatic rcs of ships which are discussed in also support the hypothesis that one should expect significantly lower rcs values in bistatic geometries.

the clutter level is about 5 db higher than the signal, and spread over perhaps 30% more of spectrum than the target. the signal to clutter ratio is thus about 6 db.

if the signal level is 9 db lower than expected this suggests that the clutter level is 4 db less than would be expected from the monostatic data. this could be seen as supporting other work which suggests that the bistatic clutter rcs is generally lower than the monostatic, but the inaccuracies associated both with the number of parameters which have had to be estimated to deduce the rcs values and with inherent variability of sea clutter levels mean that this data can provide only very limited support to that thesis.

the viability has been demonstrated of systems for pervasive global surveillance by bistatic radars using satellite communication systems as illuminators. the use of inmarsat signals as illuminators has been explored. a simple marine obstacle avoidance system has been outlined as an example application. the signal to noise ratio is strongly affected by multipath, particularly so at lower sea states, and at high sea states the sensitivity is likely to be limited by sea clutter. despite these factors, good signal to noise and signal tolutter ratios are predicted for ranges of up to about 5 km over the whole range of sea states.

the modelling behind these predictions has been verified

the comparison of the predictions and the measurements has shown that the clutter levels are very much as would be expected, i.e. slightly below the expected monostatic values, but the bistatic radar cross section of a small ship is shown to be about 9 db below the expected monostatic value. the reduced bistatic radar cross section does not invalidate the practicality of the proposed system, but does have to be taken into account when predicting the performance of bistatic systems.

references griffiths, h. d. and baker, c. j. an introduction to passive radar, artech house, 2017 cristallini, d., caruso, m., falcone, p., langellotti, d., bongioanni, c., colone, f., scaf, s., and lombardo, p., "space based passive radar enabled by the new generation of geostationary broadcast satellites," in aerospace conference, 2010 ieee, march 2010, pp. 1 11. howland, p. e., maksimiuk, d., and reitsma, g., "fm radio based bistatic radar," iee proceedings radar, sonar and navigation, vol. 152, no. 3, pp. 107 115, june 2005. griffiths, h. d. and baker, c. j., "passive coherent location radar systems. part 1: performance prediction," iee proceedings radar, sonar and navigation, vol. 152, no. 3, pp. 153 159, june 2005. colone, f., o'hagan, d. w., lombardo, p. and baker, c. j. "a multistage processing algorithm for disturbance removal and target detection in passive bistatic radar," ieee transactions on aerospace and electronic systems, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 698 722, april 2009. poullin, d., "passive detection using digital broadcasters (dab, dvb) with cofdm modulation," iee proceedings radar, sonar and naviation, vol. 152, no. 3, pp. 143 152, june 2005. "itu recommendation itu r m.1850 1," december 2012, section 4.3.4.1, table 25. retrieved 28th july 2016 at 04:55hrs gmt. [online]. available: http://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/en/areas/telecommunications/companies/ frequencymanagement/frequencyassignment/satellitecommunications/inma rsat basepage.html international electrotechnical committee standard iec 60926 1, "martime navigation and radiocommunication equipment and systems radar part 1: ship borne radar performance requirements methods of testing and required test results," 1998, section 3.3.2. briggs, j. n., target detection by marine radar, ser. radar, sonar, navigation and avionics. institution of engineering and technology, 2004. [online]. available: http://digital library.theiet.org/content/books/ ra/pbra016e nathanson, f., radar design principles: signal processing and the environment. mcgraw hill book co., 1969, [sea roughness]. skolnik, m., introduction to radar systems, ser. electrical engineering series. mcgraw hill, 2001, [reflection coefficients]. nathanson, f., radar design principles: signal processing and the environment. mcgraw hill book co., 1969, [reference to douglas sea state]. cook, c. and bernfeld, m., radar signals: an introduction to theory and application, ser. electrical science series. academic press, 1967, chapter 2. skolnik, m., introduction to radar systems, ser. electrical engineering series. mcgraw hill, 2001, [equation 2.63]. nathanson, f., radar design principles: signal processing and the environment. mcgraw hill book co., 1969, [sea clutter data]. ward, k., tough, r., and watts, s., sea clutter: scattering, the k distribution and radar performance, ser. iet radar, sonar, navigation and avionics series. institution of engineering and technology, 2006, section 8.3. horst, m. m., dyer, f. b., and tuley, m. t., "radar sea clutter model," in antennas and propagation, 1978, pp. 6 10. skolnik, m., introduction to radar systems, ser. electrical engineering series. mcgraw hill, 2001, [figure 2.7]