performance analysis of non orthogonal multiple access based satellite communication networks with hardware impairments and channel estimations feng zhou✉, rugang wang and jinhong bian

this letter investigates the impacts of hardware impairments (his) and channel estimation errors (cees) on the performance of nonrthogonal multiple access (noma) based satellite communication networks. especially, the authors obtain the closed form expression of the outage probability (op) of the considered noma based satellite communication networks. furthermore, in order to analyse the effects of his and cees in high signal to noise ratios (snrs) regime, they derive the asymptotic expression of op at high snrs, which provide efficient and fast ways to evaluate the impact of system parameters on the system performance. in addition, monte carlo simulations are provided to verify the correctness of the analytical results.

introduction: satellite communication (satcom) is considered as the future technology in the fifth generation (5g) and beyond 5g (b5g) networks, which is the promising technology in wireless communication networks. satcom is more complex than that of terrestrial networks due to its natural characters, which leads to that wired or wireless terrestrial netorks are very difficult or impossible to be deployed [1, 2]. however, satcom has its advantages for it can cover a large area and broadcast information to many users. it is viewed as a key element in emergency rescue, such as earthquake, fire disaster and transoceanic communication that the terrestrial communication cannot cover [3, 4]. in , the authors investigated the outage probability (op) for the satcom networks with multiple terrestrial users. however, the increasingly growing number of applications and services of the satcom is rapidly exhausting the limited spectral resources. thus non orthogonal multiple access (noma) scheme has recently received significant attentions. with the noma scheme, multiple signals are superposed in power domain and transmitted simultaneously over the same frequency/time channel, succesive interference cancellation (sic) is applied at the receiver side to remove the interference caused by superposition coding [6 8]. in , the authors investigated the performance of the noma based land mobile satellite networks and analysed the energy efficiency (ee), op, ergodic capacity and average symbol error rate (aser). in , the authors proposed a joint bf and power allocation scheme for the noma based satcom. however, in the reasons, such as satcom are not often ideal, the phase noise, non linearities, i/q imbalance, these disadvantages could make the transmission nodes imperfect [11, 12]. many papers have analysed this issue and derive some useful conclusions. in , the authors summarised all the factors and proposed a general hardware impairments (his) model, which consists most part of the former reasons. in , the effect of his on satcom was first analysed with a satellite relay. besides, the closed form expression for the op was also derived. in , the authors analysed the effect of his on the uplink transission networks in the satcom with multiple terrestrial relays. furthermore, the authors proposed a new relay selection scheme for the satcom. however, it should be pointed out that most of the prior works considered the ideal channel state information (csi) in the satcom. in practise, due to the high delay and fast fading natures, it is very hard to get the accurate csi of the satellite links, thus channel estiation is usually needed for the satellite links, however, channel esti (cees) always existed when using the channel mation errors estimation. currently, the issue of cees for the satcom has been studied in rarely several works [16, 17]. in , the impact of non ideal csi for satellite link on the power control scheme was investigated in the authors analysed the secrecy performance of satcom. in , primary satellite system in satcom with underlay scheme and imperfect csi. trying the authors' best knowledge, the joint impacts of cees and his on the performance of the noma based satcom remains unreorted, which motivates this letter.

in this letter, we present the closed form and asymptotic expressions for the op of the considered noma based satcom. monte carlo (mc) simulation results are given to validate the analysis.

preliminaries: we consider a satcom, which consists a satellite source }. s and d are equipped with s, two terrestrial destinations di, i [ 1, 2 single antenna, respectively. we assume that the two destinations are located in the same satellite spot beam, in order to guarantee that the two destinations can utilise the same resources. it is worth noting that only two destination cluster is considered in this letter for this form of noma has been included in the third generation partnership project (3gpp) long term evolution (lte) advanced .

by applying the noma scheme,

the satcom can broadcast a = 1, then the

(1) where hsdi is the channel coefficient between r and the ith d and modlled as shadowed rician (sr) fading. ps is the transmission power at s with ps = sptotal and the scale coefficient s [ 0, 1 ), ptotal denotes the total transmission power. xi t( ) is the detected signal of the target receier. in this letter, we assume that a1 . a2 for the reason that the channel of destination d1 is weaker than that of destination d2, thus higher power portion is allocated to destination d1. hs t( ) is the distortion noise caused by his which is shown as hs t( ) (cid:2) cn (0, k2 2ps). ksd1 a2 sd1 and ksd2 are the level of his for signal x1 t( ) and x2 t( ), respectively . ndi t( ) is the additive white gaussian noise (awgn) at the ith destiation modelled as ndi t( ) (cid:2) cn (0, d2 di now, as pointed earlier, only non ideal csi of satellite links is known. thus, non ideal channel gains need to be found out before the performance evaluations. hence, the channel can be modelled as = ˜hsdi (

where hsdi and ˜hsdi the practical and estimated fading coefficients, respectively, hsdi and ˜hsdi are assumed to have combined denotes the estimation error which is orthogonal to ergodicity, ehsdi the channel estimate coefficient ˜hsdi with modelling as a zero mean complex gaussian distribution with its variance (cid:8) 1 (cid:8)2 lsdi ysdi represent

= where lsdi (cid:11) psdi e |hsdi is the main signal to noise ratio (snr) of the trainng symbol for the satellite transmission link with his. besides, )ptotal, psdi presents the power of the pilot symbols. psdi since the detection and estimation of training signals are also impacted by his, ysdi can be rewritten with the help of the training symbols' snr for system that has ideal hardware yidsdi as is the length of training symbols and ysdi (cid:12) |2

then, by submitting (4) into (3), we can obtain

where yhsdi as minimum mean square error (mmse). reports the accuracy of channel estimation and is presented

with the help of (1) and (5), the signal to interference and noise with

distortion plus error ratio (sinder) at d2 to detect x1 t( ) is given by

final sinder for signal x2 t( ) is obtained as

next, d1 can detect x1 t( ) by treating x2 t( ) as a noise, the received

sinder at d1 is given by (7)

ptotal/d2 d1 system performance: the first thing is to get the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of lj, j [ sd2, sd1 (cid:13)

v j, 2b j and m j ≥ 0 correspond to the average power of the los comonent, the average power of the multi path component and the fading severity parameter ranging from 0 to 1, respectively. q is the pochhammer symbol .

with the similar ways, the ops of gsd22 and gsd11 are, respectively,

finally, with the help of (18), op of the considered system is given by

the final closed form expression can be derived, in order to save the length of the paper, so the final expression is left.

in the following, to obtain deep insights of the effect of channel and system parameters on the op in the considered network. hence, we give the following analysis. when ¯lj becomes large enough, (11) will be rewritten as f1 gsd22 (cid:14)

with the similar ways to derive the closed form expression of the op, x( ) are, respect

the asymptotic expression of op for pgsd1 ively, obtained as (cid:13) gth (cid:14)

by taking (24) and (25) into (19), the asymptotic expression for op

will be derived.

numerical results: in this section, some representative mc simulation results are provided to evaluate the impact of channel and system parameters. without loss of any generality, in the following numerical = k, and results, we set d2 d1 = l. gth = 3 db for figs. 1 3. the channel parameters = lsd2 lsd1 are given in table 1. some illustrations for the figures: = d2 d2 = lsd2 = g, ksd1 = ksd2 , lsd1

fig. 1 plots the op versus ¯g for different channel fading with l = 3 and s = 0.9 for case ii scenario. from fig. 1, we find that the analytical results are tight across the mc simulations. moreover, at high snrs, the asymptotic curves match well with the mc simulations, which implies that the derived theoretical expression can accurately evaluate the op performance of the considered system. it can be found that the op will be lower when the level of the impairments' level is lower. this is because that when the level is lower, more useful power will be used into the useful transmission. finally, the op will be lower when the channel is under light fading.

fig. 1 op versus ¯g for different channel fading with l = 5 and s = 0.9: case ii

fig. 2 op versus ¯g for different l with s = 0.9: case ii and as

fig. 2 illustrates the op versus different l with s = 0.9 for case ii and as scenario. it is also very clear that the analytical and asymptotic results agree well with the mc simulation ones. in addition, as expected, when l is growing larger, the op will be lower, for the reason that when l is larger, more estimation symbols will be used to estimate the (22)