performance validation of the dvb sh standard for satellite/terrestrial hybrid mobile broadcasting networks

ana bolea alamanac, paolo burzigotti, michel cohen, riccardo de gaudenzi, senior member, ieee, gianluigi liva, member, ieee, stefan lipp, orazio pulvirenti, laurent roullet, and holger stadali

abstract—the recently introduced digital video broadcasting satellite to handheld standard (dvb sh) allows for digital broadasting service provision to small mobile terminals in satellite/terestrial hybrid networks. in this paper, the key results from an in depth dvb sh performance assessment campaign lasting two years are reported. the performance results reported encompass simulation, laboratory and field trials key findings and allow deiving recommendations for preferred system parameters and congurations.

index terms—broadcasting, mobile communication, satellite

f ollowing the recent introduction of the new satellite

to handheld dvb sh standard by etsi a signifiant effort has been put in place by several key players to characerize the dvb sh performance in realistic application environents. these dvb sh performance characterization activities are complementing and extending the initial results reported in and . the effort has been focused towards three main diections: a) extension of the simulation results compared to what reported in , ; b) provision of new extensive laboratory reults; c) collection and post processing of results from field trials encompassing both the dvb sh space and ground components. dvb sh is a standard designed to provide high performance digital mobile broadcasting services in satellite, terrestrial and hybrid environments whereby simultaneous satellite and terresrial gap fillers signal reception occurs. this standard provides extensive built in flexibility whose proper exploitation requires

manuscript received february 03, 2011; revised july 20, 2011; accepted july 21, 2011. date of publication october 06, 2011; date of current version november 23, 2011.

a. bolea alamanac, p. burzigotti, and r. de gaudenzi are with the european space agency, european space and technology center, 2200 ag, noordwijk zh, the netherlands (e mail: ana.bolea.alamanc@esa.int; paolo.burzigotti@esa.int; riccardo.de.gaudenzi@esa.int).

m. cohen and l. roullet are with the alcatel lucent, 75008 paris 08, : michel.cohen@alcatel lucent.com; laurent.roullet@al

g. liva is with the dlr institute of communications and navigation, 82230

s. lipp, and h. stadali are with the fraunhofer institute for integrated circuits (iis), erlangen, germany (e mail: holger.stadali@iis.fraunhofer.de; stefan.lipp@iis.fraunhofer.de).

is with the eutelsat, 75015 paris, france (e mail: opul an in depth understanding of the standard features in the diferent operating environments. this paper provides insights on the key standard parameters and their performance impact in typical s band application scenarios thus helping the system deigner to exploit at best the dvb sh capabilities. furthermore, the large set of experimental results collected confirms that the simulation predictions are well in line with the measured perormance and the excellent system performance is proven. the dvb sh design is demonstrated to be robust to the harsh imairments of the land mobile satellite (lms) channel. furtherore dvb sh is capable to efficiently exploit the hybrid satelite/terrestrial conditions to provide a high quality digital moile broadcasting service with minimum ground infrastructure and seamless transition between the satellite and the terrestrial components. the paper is organized as follows: in section ii the dvb sh system features are shortly recalled; section iii summarizes the key performance parameters required to charcterize the dvb sh performance; section iv deals with the simulation methodology and key findings; sections v and vi report the main laboratory and field trials results. conclusions are drawn in section vii.

ii. dvb sh key system features

the dvb sh standard supports integrated/hybrid satellite terrestrial systems. these systems are an evolution of tradiional satellite mobile satellite systems (mss) where space and terrestrial transmissions are combined into a single netork. integrated systems have also a common spectrum shared between the satellite and terrestrial component.

the dvb sh system is composed by a satellite component (sc) and a complementary ground component (cgc) . the sc broadcasts the dvb sh multiplex via one or several geo (or heo) satellites. the sc coverage area is made of spot, linuistic or continental beams. in the areas with limited satelite signal availability such as cities, the terrestrial repeaters reroadcast the satellite signal thus providing the required quality of service. the dvb sh standard allows also for the incluion of extra local content in the cgc component. additionally, satellite and terrestrial signals can be combined thanks using code combining (in sh b mode) or hybrid single frequency network (in sh a mode) mechanisms introduced in the stanard . the user terminals (uts) are capable to simultaneusly receive the satellite and/or terrestrial dvb sh signal and support the seamless handover between the sc and cgc. to better understand the various sh configurations discussed in the paper, some key standard configurations are summarized in the following from :

1) system components: sc can be tdm (in sh b) or ofdm (in sh a), whereas cgc is always in ofdm to cope with the terrestrial frequency selective channel;

2) modulation formats: sh b tdm supports qpsk, 8psk and 16apsk, sh a ofdm supports qpsk and 16qam. for ofdm, various fft sizes are possible. in the folowing we focus on the 4k fft size which is particularly suited for s band systems.

3) physical layer coding: in all sh a/b cases a turbo forward error correcting (fec) scheme is adopted with a variety of coding rates spanning from .

4) receiver classes: two receiver classes are possible. class 1 has short physical layer time interleaver (200 ms), class 2 time interleaver size can extend to 10 s. class 1 is often combined with a link layer sh specific fec named ifec which can span several tenths of seconds.

in this section we summarize the key performance paramters used to assess the broadcasting system performance. in addition to the conventional bit error rate (ber) which are used to characterize the physical layer performance in simple channel cases, more elaborated performance parameters such as errored second ratio (esr) are introduced. the reason is that classical ber first order statistics are not sufficient for properly assessing video broadcasting service reception quality.

frame error ratio (fer) is the ratio between the number of multi protocol encapsulation forward error correction (mpe fec) application data tables (adts) containing errors and the total number of frames, without link layer mpe fec error correction being applied, during an observaion period. consequently, fer5 corresponds to 5% adts containing errors . the mpe fer (mfer) is the ratio of uncorrected mpe fec frames during an observation period. therefore, mfer5 corresponds to 5% uncorrected mpe fec frames during the observation period. fer (reception without mpe fec correction) and mfer (reception after mpe fec correction) showed to be extremely good indicators of the quality of reception for each service for terrestrial mobile broadcasting applications .

for the assessment of reliable video content reception, clasical first order statistics like the fer are in general insufficient when observation time is long. this remark is particularly true for the lms channels which, as discussed in section iv, can be modeled with a multi state markov model with state depenent fading statistics. according to , a good physical layer metric for video quality reception is the 5% errored secondatio in 20 s or esr5(20). the esr5(20) criterion is fulfilled when in a time interval of 20 seconds there is at most one second in error. the esr5(20) fulfillment ratio is the ratio of winows for which esr5 is fulfilled, over the total number of obervation windows; it can be evaluated as:

where window number represents the number of observation windows which may be disjoint or overlapping. it is very important that enough independent signal samples are accumulated to achieve a relible esr5(20) estimate over the channel under consideration. ideally at least one hour of signal recordings are required for the lms channel. is the number of erroneous seconds in the assumed to be 20 seconds long and

in the specific case of the tu6 terrestrial channel (see section iv a), it has been found through simulations that to an esr5(20) 99 % fulfillment . the carrier to noise ratio (c/n) threshold and esr5(20) 99 % fulfillment difference between (or 1 % fer) is typically less than 0.5 db at 50 km/h, and 1 db at 3 km/h. however, this approximation does not hold for lms channels. is roughly equivalent

iv. simulation methodology and key results

to characterize the dvb sh performance by simulation and laboratory experiments it is very important to define a number of representative mobile channel models that can be reused by the different experimenters throughout the performance assessment campaigns.

a. channel models

1) satellite mobile channel model: for the satellite channel,

two models have been adopted:

in quasi stationary reception conditions, a ricean model has been used with different rice factors (in table i); it is assumed that the fading bandwidth is so slow that the fading can be considered constant over each dvb sh physical layer frame. in case of mobile terminal operating conditions, the well known fontan lms channel model has been adopted. the s band parameters for the 3 state lms channels have been obtained from and and are in general dependent from the elevation angle. a 40 derees satellite elevation angle has been selected as well representative for an average geo elevation angle and because it corresponds to the most reliable and complete data set available. in order to obtain statistically stable data, sufficiently long channel sampling sequences are required. the length of the test sequence is 1 hour for 50 km/h and 2 hours for 3 km/h.

2) satellite nonlinear channel model: a satellite payload model has been introduced in the simulation chain to faithfully model the signal distortions induced by the satellite amplifier and to analyze the impact on the end to end dvb sh perforance. the satellite payload distortions are of two types: a) linear distortions such as amplitude and group delay caused by (1)

fig. 1. s band twta typical am/am, and am/pm and efficiency characterstics. note that x axis refers to the cw ibo (db).

the filters; b) nonlinear distortions caused by high power amlifier(s) (hpa) operated near the saturation point. the linear distortions effects are of second order compared to the nonlinear distortions and are therefore neglected in the following. for a dvb sh type of system requiring large rf power (in the order of hundreds of watts per beam) typically traveling wave tubes (twta) are adopted for the hpa. fig. 1 shows typical ampliude modulation (am) and phase modulation (pm) am/am and am/pm transfer characteristics for an s band twta. furher details of the satellite payload modeling are discussed in section iv.

effective isotropic radiated power (eirp) requirements and antenna performance limitations lead, in most cases, to a rf power that exceeds the capabilities of single amplifiers available for space applications. therefore power combining methods must be adopted and two main payload classes can be distinguished:

1) "single carrier/hpa": this solution is implemented for a single beam satellite or multibeam satellites that do not require flexible power sharing between beams. the required eirp is typically obtained by using parallel twtas through network or polarization combining. each twta amplifies only one signal (but several twtas amplify the same signal). therefore, if needed, it can be driven close to saturation. the satellite is then said to belong to the "single carrier/hpa" class, providing a power advantage for the tdm waveform, which does not require the same twta back off being the ofdm waveform inherently a multi carrier signal. this configuration is selected when there is a need to reallocate available power to the different beams in orbit. in this case, the amplificaion is performed through a low power beam forming network (bfn) followed by a shared twta network exploiting a stack of multiport amplifiers (mpa) conected to the transmit antenna feeds. each twta now amplifies a weighted sum of several signals i.e. it oprates in a multiple carriers/hpa configuration. this architecture implements spatial power combining that provides the flexible power allocation to the various beams. this flexibility is achieved at the expense of operating the twtas in multi carrier mode (i.e. with sufficient back off). therefore the power advantage of tdm over ofdm is diminished. in the following, the two key payload architectures will be discussed. the satellite platform direct current (dc) power limitation calls for a twta(s) operation as close as possible to the maximum twta saturated power. at system level the twta is typically characterized by a maximum (saturated) power and three key performance characteristics: the am/am, am/pm and dc to rf conversion efficiency (the latter is not shown in fig. 1). 2) "multi carrier/hpa":

from a system perspective, the quantity to minimize is the

total payload degradation in db given by:

expressed in db being the average symbol energy over noise density required to achieve the target fer in the nonlinear and reference awgn channel respectively, ibo, obo represent the twta input and output back off expressed in db, while represents the twta dc to radio frequency (rf) conversion efficiency at the current ibo drive level. both obo and are computed when a real dvb sh signal (not a continous wave (cw) as assumed in fig. 1) is transmitted at the selected hpa drive level (ibo). an accurate payload degraation assessment and twta operating point optimization layer simulations and accurate involve complex physical and (2) fig. 2. functional block diagram of the dvb sh simulator.

system modeling. intuitively the ibo optimization will result in the best trade off between the loss of twta efficiency represented by the term obo(db) plus the efficiency loss term [db] against the channel distortion losses represented by the term (in db) which will reduce with

3) terrestrial channel model: for the terrestrial mobile channel, we focus on the terrestrial outdoor channel for which experimental results have been collected and a consolidated model exists. a) reference channels: awgn and rayleigh: before measuring the system performance in more complex mobile channels it is important to derive the system performance under two reference channel cases i.e. awgn and flat uncorrelated rayleigh fading. the two reference channel cases allow for an easy verification against reference performances of the equipment under test. in particular, the awgn channel allows deriving the reference and ultimate system performance while the flat uncorrelated rayleigh fading introduces the typical terrestrial channel amplitude variability these models do not depend on terminal speed / doppler and implement an ideal time interleaver.

b) single transmitter: classical tu6: the terrestrial urban 6 taps (tu6) channel is widely used for terrestrial mobile networks. it is composed of a tapped delay line (tdl) with 6 taps as described in and with tdl parameters summarized in table ii. to each tap is associated a delay and an average attenuation power on top of which a unit power rayleigh complex fading process is applied. for each tdl tap, the rayleigh process is independently generated and is characterized by correlated fading with a programmable power spectral density (psd). the maximum fading doppler frequency is defined by being the moile speed, the speed of light . the rayleigh fading is characterized by a jakes doppler power spectral density profile (psd) given by: the carrier frequency and

for the tu6 channel, time series of 10 to 20 minutes real time duration were used for collecting performance statistics.

c) hybrid channel model: the hybrid channel tests model the situations when the on air signal is a combination of terestrial and satellite signals. this situation is particularly intersting when the satellite and the terrestrial signals are both using ofdm at the same frequency. this mode is called dvb sha sfn in the standard. hybrid sfn channel is defined by the comination at the receiver of:

(cid:129) one satellite link under its or su lms conditions; (cid:129) one or several terrestrial links under tu6 conditions. in the case of hybrid sfn, the two signals are at the same frequency, using the same modulation/coding/interleaving schemes, and carrying exactly the same data. further details on the hybrid channel parameters adopted can be found in section iii c 3.

a great effort has been devoted to define an accurate dvb sh simulation chain and methodology to derive a sound reference performance baseline. these simulated performances have been used to compare with experimental results obtained in the laboratory and in the field. to this aim, two independent comprehensive simulators for both dvb sha and sh b have been developed and thoroughly cross validated. the simulator allows obtaining performance results for both perfect and real channel estimation although the simulation results reported in the following are related to ideal channel estimation. impact of real channel estimation has been derived by laboratory meaurements (see section v). a functional block diagram of the dvb sh simulator is shown in fig. 2. the simulator includes (i) a dvb sh compliant transmitter chain, both at physical (3)

and optional ifec link layer , with physical layer fec, time interleaver, pilot insertion; (ii) terrestrial/satellite/hybrid channels model generators and (iii) demodulator with ideal or real channel estimation, time de interleaver, physical layer fec decoder and ifec decoder when applicable. both dvb sh ofdm and tdm modes have been implemented.

for the tdm case the dvb s2 carrier phase estimator described in clause 3.6 of has been adapted to the dvb sh case. in the ofdm case, the channel transfer function estimaion is performed through adaptive least mean square (lms) interpolation both on time and frequency domain exploiting the knowledge of the channel at pilot positions. firstly time domain adaptive interpolation is performed to calculate the channel transfer function at scattered pilot subcarriers. based on these estimates, frequency domain adaptive interpolation is then performed at the non pilot subcarriers. a more detailed decription of the simulated demodulators and channel estimation algorithms can be found in annex a of . as the demodulator signal re acquisition is not fully simuated, a behavioral emulator of this important functionality can be optionally activated. this is particularly important for lms its and su channels whereby the demodulator can frequently loose lock. to emulate the demodulator behavior in fading channels with deep and long fades, a state machine model was devised, considering the typical demodulator acquisition handling. the overall behavior is modeled with four states, representing the following effects: a) loss of demodulator synchronization because of the received c/n falls below the oprational threshold. consequently, the demodulator transitions to the coasting mode and if no re acquisition occurs before a define timeout it moves to the re acquisition mode; b) when the demodulator is operating below the c/n threshold, it feeds the turbo decoder with erased bits; c) demodulator re acquisition time (assumed to be a constant value for simplicity here) once the c/n is back above threshold; d) dvb sh time slicing impact on the demodulator performance and behavior. as an fig. 3. state machine representing the demodulator process. c/n: estimated c/n value at the demodulator input; th: demodulator c/n threshold for staying locked ((cid:0) (cid:0)6 db); (cid:0) : duration of a state; (cid:0) : maximum coasting state duration for the receiver operating below threshold (c.a. 30.5 ms); (cid:0) : burst duration (depends on the number target burst(s) and slices); (cid:2) : time interval between slices (depends on the number target burst(s) and slices); (cid:0) : demodulator acquisition time (c.a. 100 ms). state (0) when the end of a burst occurs. while the green states (diagonal lines, namely states 1, 2, and 3) are driven by the modulator behavior, the red state (vertical lines, nominally state 0) represents the time slicing mechanism (see tables iii v).

c. simulation results

1) awgn and lms channels:

a) awgn simulation results: for the awgn channel, the performance of an ideal receiver is given in table vi for ofdm and in table vii for tdm. the values reported in tables vi and vii exclude any link layer forward error correction (llec). an ideal transmitter is assumed, as well as an ideal reeiver with perfect synchronization and ideal channel knowldge. pilot overhead in c/n is only taken into account what concerns the boosting of pilots in ofdm mode (0.3 db) which of the data carriers with respect to the c/n. reduces the any other overhead (signaling, guard intervals) is addressed in the spectral efficiency curves shown in the following. table vi theoretical c/n (db) in awgn channel for tdm @ (cid:0)(cid:2)(cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5)(cid:6)

cases considered are related to vehicular applications thus a typcal speed of 50 km/h has been analyzed.

class 1 receivers: as reported in section v b of , asuming a typical satellite eirp of 63 dbw, the performance of class 1 vehicular receiver using mpe ifec with interleaving length up to 10 s does not always meet the 90 % esr5(20) fulllment target. therefore, a sensitivity analysis to the length of the protection period and to the code rate has been performed. the sensitivity analysis aims to find the optimal ifec parameers in each scenario, keeping the same reference c/n. the reults presented for class 1 receivers are showing the minimum required interleaver length to fulfill the esr5(20) criterion at 90% as a function of the supported aggregated multiplex net bit rate. in particular, for each point of the class 1 curve, the underying physical layer configuration is kept constant and only the link layer protection level (coding rate and interleaver size) is modified. it is important to notice that the curves represent the boundary conditions i.e. all the system configurations which beong to the left bottom part of the plane identified by the simlated curve and the dashed vertical line are viable solutions. indeed, for a given interleaver length, all the bit rates up to the point reported in the curve are guaranteed with 90 % of esr5(20) fulfillment as minimum.

section 5.2 is kept. influence of the type of long physical layer interleaver , (uniform (u) versus uniform late (ul)) is also investigated. in the following, when comparing the ofdm versus tdm performances, the subsequent different assumpions shall be recalled: a) the guard interval value chosen for ofdm; b) the different net bit rates; c) the different implemenation losses; d) the different noise bandwidth assumption made. 1) vehicular reception in lms su and sh a waveform (ofdm): the simulation performances reported in this section have been obtained in lms su environment and for sh a waveform with a 63 dbw eirp satellite (reference cases in tables iii and iv). fig. 4 shows the sensitivity analysis in terms of bit rate supported versus the ifec interleaver length for class 1 terminals. the target bit rate for the reference case is indicated by the dashed line: it represents the system capacity including the total number of services. the target bit rate differs between ofdm and tdm and the exact value depends on the specific waveform configuration. under these working conditions, to support higher bit rate (i.e. higher ifec code rate) while satisfying the 90 % esr5(20) fulfillment target a larger interleaving depth is necessary. it is observed that, even under ideal channel estimation assumptions, 16qam fec rate underperforms qpsk combined with in terms of supported bit rate for the same c/n. on the contrary, performances are generally slightly worse for 16qam. fig. 5 reports the esr5(20) fulfillment for class 2 receiver as a function of the c/n. the c/n setting used for the reference case (shown by the vertical dashed line) was 11.2 db according to a typical link budget used as baseline for this analysis. the required c/n to guarantee the 90 % fulfillment of esr5(20) is found to be below 5 db, i.e. 6.2 db below the reference configuration c/n setting (dashed vertical line).

2) vehicular reception in a lms su and sh b waveform (tdm): the simulation performances reported in this secion have been obtained in an lms su channel and for a sh b waveform with a 63 dbw eirp satellite (reference cases in tables iii and iv). fig. 6 shows the sensitivity analysis for class 1 terminals. the same conclusions as for the corresponding case of sh a can be drawn except that in this case the 8psk modulation format has a slight adantage over qpsk above a throughput of 2.7 mbps. fig. 7 shows the sensitivity analysis for class 2 receiver. the c/n setting used for the reference case was 12.3 db (shown by the vertical dashed line). the required c/n to guarantee the 90 % fulfillment of esr5 was found to be3.9 db, i.e. 8.2 db below the reference configuration c/n seting (dashed vertical line).

3) vehicular reception in a lms its and dvb sh a waveorm (ofdm): the simulation performances reported in this clause have been obtained in lms its environment and for sh a waveform with a 63 dbw eirp satellite (refrence cases in tables iii and iv). as shown in fig. 8, for the reference case, in lms its, an sh a class 1 receiver cannot reach the target 2.2 mbps supported net bit rate with a 63 dbw satellite eirp (represented as vertical dashed line). fig. 9 shows the sensitivity analysis for class 2 receivers. the c/n setting used for the reference case was 11.2 db (shown by the vertical dashed line). the required c/n to guarantee the 90 % fulfillment of esr5 was found to be 9.2 db, i.e. 2 db below the reference configuration setting. 4) vehicular reception in a lms its and dvb sh b waveorm (tdm): the simulation performances reported in this section have been obtained in an lms its channel and for a sh b waveform with a 63 dbw satellite eirp (refernce cases in tables iii and iv). from fig. 10, it can be noticed that a sh b class 1 receiver is able to guarantee supported net bit rate slightly lower than the target capacity for the reference case (vertical dashed line in the following figure) of up to 2.5 mbps with roughly 25 s of ifec intereaver length at the reference c/n of 12.8 db. the perforances for the qpsk modulation with a code rate of 1/2 at physical layer are close to those for an 8psk modulation with a code rate of 1/3. in this configuration the advantage fig. 11. sh b, class 2 uniform, physical layer interleaver length fulfilling the esr5(20) criterion at 90 % as a function of the supported net bit rate. diferent physical layer configurations: qpsk and 8psk, lms its channel., (cid:0) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:0)(cid:7), satellite (cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11) (cid:2) (cid:12)(cid:13) (cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:16).

for the qpsk for the reference 10 s interleaver length is limited to about 10 % in terms of bit rate (given a fixed interleaver length) or interleaver length (given a fixed suported bit rate). fig. 11 shows the same analysis for class 2 receiver under . also in this case the same reference qpsk modulation slightly outperforms 8psk. under this condition, both qpsk and 8psk modulations guarantee high supported net bit rate for the reference 10 s physical layer interleaver. in alternative the interleaver length can be reduced to 200 ms for achieving the target supported net bit rate of 2.5 mbps. fig. 12 shows the sensitivity analysis for class 2. the c/n setting used for the reference case was 12.3 db (shown by the vertical dashed line). the required c/n to guarantee the 90 % fulfillment of esr5 is found to be 8 db, i.e. 4.2 db below the reference configuration setting. c) impact of interleaver profile: this section compares the performances of the two interleaver profiles considered for the class 2 receiver (u and ul as defined in clause 7.2.3.3.5.3 of ). the uniform long (u) interleaver provides the best time diversity (for a given interleaver length) at the expenses of a longer zapping time and recovery time after a prolonged link outage. the uniform late interleaver (ul) represents a compromise between the uniform long interleaver good time diversity and the short interleaver fast zapping. although only sh b waveform findings are reported, the results are considered of general validity, thus they are applicable to the sh a profile too. both u and ul interleaver profiles show excellent performance in the reference system configurations, if typical satellite eirp and vehicular terminals category 1 are fig. 13. sh b, class 2:—qpsk 1/3—lms su—50 km/h—sensitivity analsis to c/n value for a tdm modulation.

considered. when the system is operating in high esr5(20) fulfillment regions (i.e. 90% or above), the performances of the two profiles are almost equivalent and it is also possible to exploit the fast zapping feature provided by the ul profile . on the contrary, when operating at the target 90 % of esr5(20) fulfillment, the u interleaver profile is characterized by a lower c/n working point compared to ul. the u interleaver provides extra link margin for possible system optimization in terms of satellite eirp, terminal rf performance or spectral efficiency. more specifically, three different cases have been analyzed: a) lms su scenario at 50 km/h for vehicular recepion (fig. 13); b) lms its scenario at 50 km/h for vehicular reception (figs. 14 and 15); c) lms su scenario at 3 km/h for handheld reception. in the scenario a), the u interleaver meets the 90 % esr5(20) fulfillment at roughly 4 db of c/n with a saving of 4 db with respect the ul. this represents the worst case for u interleaver profile within the selected cases. the u gain wrt ul difference reduces to values below 1 db for cases b) and c). when the interleaver length is set to the reference duration of 10 seconds (shown by the horizontal dashed line in fig. 15), the u interleaver supports a bit rate of 4.2 mbps with an increase of roughly 0.5 mbps with respect the ul. when the same throughput is considered, the required u interleaver duation is almost half of the ul one. summarizing, the zapping time reduction provided by the ul interleaver profile is paid by a c/n performance reduction that depends on the mobile table viii (continued.)

environment considered and ranges from 1 to 4 db in the cases investigated.

2) terrestrial channel: table viii summarizes the simulated and fer 1% for the dvb sh required c/n at ofdm waveform for all possible dvb sh a physical layer coding rates and modulation with short physical layer intereaver (i.e. 200 ms qpsk and 100 ms for 16qam). the refrence configuration of 5 mhz, fft 2k and a guard interval (gi) of 1/4 and two mobile speeds (3 km/h and 50 km/h) have been taken into account. fig. 16. simulated capacity vs. c/n results for ofdm, tu6 channels at (cid:0) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:0)(cid:6).

from table viii and other simulation results performed with a ul interleaver it may be noted that: a) with short physical layer interleaving (class 1 demodulator no ifec) the c/n threshlds for esr5(20) fulfillment at 99% at 3 km/h are typically 1.5/2.0 db higher than those at 50 km/h for qpsk is considered and between 2.0 2.5 db higher for 16qam; b) with ul intereaving of 10 s (class 2 interleaver), the improvement at 3 km/h is around 1 db for qpsk, and 2 db for 16qam, while, as exected, at 50 km/h, the improvement is less significant and in average limited to 0.5 db for both qpsk and 16qam.

the following figs. 16 and 17 summarize the simulated tu6 performance for various configurations assuming ideal demodulator channel estimation. for the reasons explained in section iii a, the quality of service criterion used is to be in line with the measured results. the results are repreented as capacity versus c/n for different dvb sh configuations: a) 16 qam modulation with fec coding rates and two different physical layer interleaving; b) qpsk modulation with fec coding rates and two different physical layer interleaving profiles. the physcal layer interleaving profiles are: a) short corresponding to 200 ms class 1 physical layer interleaver; b) long corresponding to 10 sec class 2 uniform late interleaver.

figs. 16 and 17 highlight the additional interleaving gain proided by long physical interleaving. for 50 km/h a longer intereaving provides only a small additional gain for 16qam and almost zero for qpsk. for 3 km/h the longer interleaver gain is more significant i.e. 1 db for 16qam and 0.5 db for qpsk.

3) hybrid channels: according to the hybrid channel model introduced in section iv, the user terminal will receive the signal from the two different sources: (cid:129) the terrestrial repeater(s) and a following a tu6 propaga

tion channel for a mobile speed of 50 km/h

(cid:129) the satellite and following a lms propagation channel: intermediate tree shadowing (its) or sub urban (su) at the same mobile speed.

in the so called sha sfn configuration, the different signals generated by the different terrestrial and satellite sources are strictly identical, same frequency, same bandwidth, same waveform (ofdm) with same modulation, coding and inerleaving and carrying the same data. thanks to the ofdm gi, the inter symbol interference is typically negligible. the simulations have been performed with class 2 terminals. the simulator performs combination of terrestrial and satellite signals affected by a differential delay. this differential delay imposes the use of channel estimator. in the simulator, the references c/n values for esr5(20) 90 % fulfillment are the following:

table ix summarizes simulations results with different lms channels and with two repeater heights. a single repeater has been considered. the results show some degradation when the differential satellite/terrestrial delay is larger than the ofdm guard time (gt), here of with the symbol duration, and 88 when gi is 1/4. it is remarked ibo/obo optimization for single hpa per beam, awgn channel. the blue line indicating the total degradation corresponds to the quantity (cid:0)

that the different simulations results are in line with equivalent laboratory tests presented in section v c.

4) satellite nonlinear channel: the reference demodulators as defined in section iii b have been used to derive the simuated performance. in particular, the demodulator implements pilot aided channel estimation. therefore, the impact of imperect channel estimation is included. the physical layer configuation considered is qpsk for both ofdm and tdm. the optimum ibo/obo ratio is derived via simulation as link margin maximization according to the definiions provided in section iv a 2. however, the total payload was evaluated neglecting the twta dc to degradation rf conversion efficiency. in fact it was observed that this simplication has minimum impact on the optimum operating point. therefore eqn. (2) simplifies to: (4)

a) single hpa per beam: fig. 18 shows the total degraation as function of ibo when an awgn channel is considered. the optimum ibo (and corresponding obo) has been found to be 2.3 db (1.8 db) for the sh a configuration and 0.3 db (0.7 db) for the sh b configuration. it is worth noting curve is almost flat around the optimum ibo that the , resulting in a reduced degradation when a sub opimum ibo is chosen. in addition, the obo variation is within 0.5 db when the ibo is kept below 3 db. thus, ibo/obo point could be adapted according to the design of the payload with little degradation in terms of end to end performance. the for sh a amounts to 3 db, for sh b to 0.8 db. thus sh b provides a remarkable 2.2 db power advantage when oprating in a single carrier/hpa satellite payload.

b) multiport amplifier: this section refers to the multiort amplifier (mpa) payload configuration as described in section iii a 2. more specifically a 8 by 8 mpa (multiple muliplex per hpa, as per fig. 19) followed by high power beam forming network (bfn) has been considered. no mpa misatch has been considered and the hpas have been modeled assuming all hpas to have the same am/am and am/pm charcteristics as shown in section iii a 2. in addition, the same hpa input power drive has been assumed. fig. 19. multi port amplifier configuration.

the performance has been verified by simulation for different levels of mpa load, up to three active inputs over eight available ports. the evaluation of the total payload degradation always refer to a single dvb sh signal input.

as function of ibo when sh a conguration in awgn channel is considered. the optimum ibo (and corresponding obo) has been found to be 2.8 db (1.9 db) with one active input and 2.3 db (1.8 db) with three active input performance is ports. as expected sh a ofdm mpa practically the same as for the single hpa case. this is because the signal envelope is characterized by a quasi rayleigh disributed in both cases. on the contrary, in the mpa sh b tdm performance is degraded compared to the single case, the hpa/carrier case. this is because the hpas composing the mpa hpas are now operating in multi carrier mode even if the inividual mpa input ports are driven by a quasi constant enveor lope tdm signal. as expected, in case of mpa the tdm and ofdm is almost identical and amounts to 3 db. also in this case the point, resulting in a reduced degradation when a different ibo is chosen. thus, the ibo /obo point could be adapted according to the design of the payload with little degradation of the end to end performance. fig. 20 shows the

curve is almost flat around the

v. laboratory results

fig. 21 describes the most general satellite, terrestrial, hyrid laboratory test bench. different operating modes can be emulated:

1) terrestrial only: implementing tu6 channel at various moile speeds (first adder is disabled and will let only tu6 signal); ibo/obo optimization for sh a with different mpa loads: (a) 1 sh a carrier and (b) 3 sh a carriers. the triangle indicated the optimum ibo operating

fig. 21. laboratory test set up for dvb sh performance assessment.

table x measurements configurations for the laboratory tests

hybrid satellite/terrestrial mode: the hybrid channel is emulated by adding together the tu6 and the lms channels when the first adder is on. in this case the dvb sh demodulator performs maximal ratio combining between the satellite and terrestrial signals. the dvb sh configurations used for the test are sumarized in table x.

laboratory tests have been performed for both sh b (tdm) and sh a (ofdm) waveforms over lms channels. the meaurements were performed in its and su channels at 50 km/h during a 3000 s time period. the channel emulator used in this case implements the lms model described in section iv a 1. tests were restricted to class 2 terminal with uniform long physcal layer time interleaving. if we compare tdm and ofdm results reported in table xi we can conclude that: a) qpsk in both tdm and ofdm waveforms has practically the same performances in su and its; b) ofdm 16qam and tdm 16apsk results show some differences. ofdm 16qam perorms better than tdm 16apsk, especially in its (1.5 db) but the interleaver configurations are not exactly the same. a comarison with section iv c 1 simulations results has been comiled in table xii.

ofdm laboratory and simulation results are in line for the su channel, but in the its case the measurements resulted to yield lower c/n demodulator threshold than simulation. in tdm mode laboratory measurements are showing the same trend. the lower measured c/n demodulator threshold comared to simulations finding is related to the faster reacquisition time of the demodulator tested compared to what modeled in the simulations (see section iv b).

b. terrestrial channel

the following figs. 22 and 23 summarize the tu6 perormance measured in laboratory using a real receiver for various dvb sh test configurations (as per. table v). the quality of service criterion adopted is . the performance results are represented as available net the following waveform conit figurations: a) 16 qam modulation with fec coding rates , two gi values and two different physical interleaving profiles; b) qpsk modulation with fec coding rates , two gi values rate versus c/n for table xi summary of measured required c/n (db) @ esr5(20) 90 %: su 50 corresponds sub urban lms channel at 50 km/h, its 50: intermediate tree shadowing lms channel at 50 km/h

the physical layer interleaving profiles are: a) short correponding to 200 ms class 1 interleaver; b) long interleaver prole corresponding to 10 sec class 2 interleaver. two cases are provided: with gi of 1/8 and with gi of 1/4.

the simulated performance of section iv were using a ul interleaver profile while for the measurements a u interleaver profile has been used. results not reported here show that for required c/n at low and medium speed, gi has no impact on the required c/n values.

measurements have been made with all the different moduation/coding cases, and at different speeds up to the maximum sustainable doppler spread. the results in figs. 24 and 25 represent the variation of required c/n versus the applied maximum doppler spread corresponding to a certain mobile fig. 24. qpsk terrestrial performances in tu6 channel at various doppler spreads.

speed, depending on the carrier frequency as discussed in section iv a 3. different 1) awgn required of the graph; values are represented in figs. 24 and 25:

: "isolated" points on the left side

, corresponding to the vertical part of the curves and maximum doppler spread for which a c/n asymptote is observed; 3) required 2)

at , corresponding to half of the

maximum doppler spread supported;

corresponding to the doppler spread for which a 3 db c/n impairment wrt the at

is experienced. the results show that the required c/n is almost constant for a wide range of doppler spread values (user velocity) shown in abscissa. at

fig. 26 provides a summary of the maximum doppler spread in s band versus the transmitted bit rate for a 5 mhz channel. 16qam with rate 2/3 fec (highest coding rate posible) allows reaching a 10 mbps maximum bit rate when the doppler spread is below 350 hz. qpsk instead is limited to 5 mbps when the doppler spread is below 450 hz. table xiii examples of laboratory measurement results in hybrid channel compared to simulation results from section iv c 2

fig. 26. maximum doppler spread with respect to bit rate (class 1).

these results can be summarized as follows:

is approximately inversely proportional to the fft length. this is an expected result as the fft block length increases with the fft size and the coherence time of the channel decreases with the doppler spread.

in this section a synthesis of the different test results for the hybrid channel is provided. according to the hybrid channel model defined in section iv a 3, different test have been perormed using the test bench described in section v. the laboatory test configuration emulates on one branch the terrestrial tu6 channel and on the other branch the lms channel. due to the limitations of the test bench only one terrestrial location can be tested which represent the "artificial" case of small radius circular drive for which the received terrestrial average c/n and the differential delay between satellite and terrestrial signal are both constant. the differential delay between the satellite and the terrestrial signals can be adjusted to cover the ofdm guard time. table xiii provides the laboratory results and compares them to the ones derived by simulation (in brackets). the good matching between simulation and measurement findings is evient.

fig. 28 represents the different results in sub urban channels at 50 km/h with class 2 terminal, (su) with 16qam and repeater at 45 m height. each curve in fig. 29 corresponds to a given value of the terrestrial received signal c/n shown in the legend. a satellite only reference curve is also provided as reference to assess the terrestrial gap filler advantage. the reception quality criterion is the esr5(20) fulfillment ratio of 90 %, which requires a satellite in satellite only reception.

from this example we can derive the following conclusions: 1) most of the hybrid reception cases evaluated provide an improvement compared to the satellite only reception as the required c/n is decreasing even when the differential delay is out of the gi.

2) when the terrestrial signal is under the demodulator c/n threshold (for instance in 16qam while 9 db are required), the resulting quality of service with satellite on (even with very low satellite c/n values such as 6 db) is above 99 % esr5(20) fulfillment.

3) the green curve (with terrestrial received c/n equal to 10 db and with differential delay equal to 164 % of the gi) shows some slight degradation in the satellite reception ( 0.5 db) for esr (5) 20 fulfillment ratio of 95 %.

fig. 28 shows the required c/n to get 90 % esr5(20) fulfillent rate in a satellite channel in presence of terrestrial comonent. three different repeater heights have been considered, modulation is qpsk with rate 1/3 and . the abcissa represents the terrestrial c/n, and different curves corespond to different repeater heights. the terrestrial propagaion model is the cost 231—hata model. according to this fig. 28. examples of performances in sub urban area at 45 m with 16qam (cid:0) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:0)(cid:4).

fig. 29. qpsk results synthesis in sub urban channel with (cid:5)(cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:0)(cid:7).

model, for a given distance from the terrestrial repeater, the reeived signal strength increases with the repeater height. the satellite only horizontal line in fig. 28 represents the c/n reuired in lms channel only. it can be observed that in satellite only lms su channel conditions the required satellite c/n is 6 db for esr5(20) fulfillment of 90 % while in terrestrial only tu6 channel the required c/n for required quality of service is 3 db. the points below the blue horizontal line correspond to the hybrid mode improvement region while the points above correpond to the degradation region. when operating in hybrid reeption conditions lower c/n values are required for both satelite and terrestrial components to achieve the same esr5(20) fulfillment ratio.

two numerical examples are provided to discuss the fig. 28 findings. in the first case corresponding to a 30 m repeater height and terrestrial , the required esr5(20) 90% availability is obtained with satellite channel c/n of 4 db i.e. 2 db lower than in the satellite only reception case despite the very low terrestrial c/n. considering that in this case the comined signal has a c/n of 4.5 db we can conclude that there is a diversity gain of 1.5 db compared to satellite only reception (but a 1.5 db loss compared to terrestrial only reception).

in the second case at 0 db terrestrial c/n only 0 db of satelite c/n is required to fulfill the 90% esr5(20) target i.e. 6 db lower satellite c/n than in case of satellite only. being the comined there is a 3 db diversity gain compared to satellite only reception in this second case (but no diversity gain compared to terrestrial only reception). this second case shows the large gain possible when operating in hybrid conditions typially at the edge of urban areas. it is remarked that the maximum fig. 30. trial routes: route 1 (above) and route 2 (below). the position of the terrestrial repeaters is indicated by yellow pins.

occurs when the teross of 1 db in su channel for restrial . at this terrestrial c/n the differential satellite/terrestrial delay is outside the ofdm guard interval as it corresponds to , which represents 314 % of the ofdm and 157 % at .

vi. field trials results

within the j ortigia project , field trials have been carried out in pisa area (italy) during april 2010. in the field test area, a complementary ground component (cgc) with two low power terrestrial repeaters has been deployed, and it has been enriched by an additional, high power repeater, located in the vicinity of pisa. the position of the two low power repeaters (named mbi 1 and mbi 2) and of the high power one (named cd 2) with respect to the test routes is indicated in fig. 30. the two low power repeaters were both located at a height of 15 meers approximately. they were equipped with a 50 w amplifier over a unique sector and provide an eirp (equivalent isotropic radiated power) of 62 dbm. both repeaters were pointing toards the center of pisa. the high power repeater was located on a nearby mountain, at 900 m of altitude. the high power amplier of this site (66.5 dbm eirp) combined with its location and height was sufficient to provide nearly full service availability over pisa area, even in absence of the satellite component. since this configuration is not representative of the average european city, it was decided to investigate a configuration where the cgc coverage is partial (and hence need to be complemented by the satellite component). to this end, the cd 2 repeater eirp was reduced by 10 db and pointed towards the city of lucca, which is located approximately at 20 km north east of pisa. due to that, only side lobes of cd 2 were actually directed to pisa. the satellite component was provided by the w2a satellite, with its 62.5 dbw eirp over the trials area.

two trial routes have been considered. route 1 was chosen to assess the performance in urban and sub urban scenarios. most of the route is located in the city of pisa. the first and the last part of the route (part a in fig. 31) are characterized by an open sub urban environment on a fast route on the north south axis. part b passes through a sub urban area, which is slightly more populated by large buildings than part a. part b has a predominant east west traveling direction. parts c and d are mainly urban areas, with large buildings on the sides of the road. part e is a tree alley running on a west east axis (fig. 32).

route 2 (fig. 33) represents mainly sub urban and highway/ rural scenarios. part a is a fast road on the east west axis, in a sub urban area where mostly factories and stores are present. part b represents a highway on the north south axis, with some bridges from time to time. part c is a sub urban (small village) area with low buildings. part d is mainly rural. a large fraction of the route in part d is affected by tree shadowing due to a long row of trees located on the south direction (fig. 34). part e represents a rural area as well and the last section is an open sub urban area again. fig. 32. route 1, part e.

in table xv. they can be summarized as follows:

two receivers of two distinct manufacturers have been used for collecting simultaneous measurements by connecting them to the same antenna setup. the automotive dvb sh antenna used during the trials receives the rhcp (right hand circular polarized) signals from the satellite network and the vp (verical polarized) signals from the terrestrial network, and proides a g/t of 21.5 db/k. in certain sessions, two antennas have been connected to investigate the service availability gain provided by antenna diversity. table xvi summary of the results for class 1 vs class 2 comparison (same spectral efficiency, (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) (cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:9))

we compare next the performance of class 1 and class 2 configurations with identical overall spectral efficiency of 0.666 bit/s/hz:

since class 1 configurations (sh a2/b2) have to split their redundancy between the physical and the link layer, their physcal layer coding is less robust and therefore they have roughly 2 db less link margin w.r.t. the corresponding class 2 configuraions. for both sh a and sh b cases, the difference among the configurations emerges in the most critical situation, i.e. when the complementary ground component is switched off, and a satellite only coverage is available. for these cases, the class 2 configuration provides evident gains w.r.t. the class 1 one, alhough the class 1 configurations are protected over a longer time span by mpe ifec (26 seconds). in sh a, the class 2 configuration gains 20% points in esr5(20) service availability (over route 1) and 7% on route 2. in sh b, the class 2 configration gains 15% points in esr5(20) service availability (over route 1) and 10% in service availability over route 2. the satellite only coverage is more critical on route 1 (urban/subrban route). in this case a significant improvement by the class 2 configuration can be observed in the part e of route 1, i.e. in conditions of tree shadowing, and in general in most of the sub urban areas with traveling direction east west (fig. 35). in the figures, green dots indicate the part of the route where the esr5(20) is fulfilled and in red the areas where is not. fig. 35. comparison between the sh a trials on route 1— satellite only, class 1 / sh a2 (left) and class 2 / sh a1 (right).

in this section, we compare sh a versus. sh b with both satellite and complementary ground component contributions. the comparisons are carried out for different configurations, i.e. for class 1, sh a2 vs. sh b2 (both configurations have low spectral efficiency), while for class 2, we compare sh a1 versus. sh b1 (low spectral efficiency) and sh a3 vs. sh b8 (high spectral efficiency). the results are summarized in table xvii. the code combining principle for sh b is exlained in detail in sect. 7.2.2.3.3 of . in a nutshell it allows soft combining at symbol level before fec decoding from the two signal received through the tdm and ofdm demodulators even when different coding rates are used. an important remark deals with the spectral efficiency of sh a sfn and sh b. more specifically, the tables report the spectral efficiency including the physical layer coding and modulation, and (where relevant) mpe ifec. however, it shall be considered that at system level sh a sfn is in general more efficient, since the terrestrial and the satellite signals share the same bandwidth, while for sh b the two signals are segregated in two separate bands. case where the available data set shows a remarkable difference is the case of the class 1 configurations on route 2, i.e. where the terrestrial coverage is weaker. in this case, the sh a configuraion looses 6 % points w.r.t. the full service availability provided by the sh b configuration (sh b2). the losses are mostly conned away from the area where terrestrial repeaters are located, and in particular in the part of the route where the satellite only component tends to fail when used alone due to the tree shadwing area (part d of the route, refer to fig. 34).

c. results with satellite only, cgc only, and with hybrid network configurations

the possibility to test a given configuration with different network settings is crucial for understanding the role of hybrid networks. therefore, a set of trials has been carried out over the two routes keeping the same waveform configuration and turning off either the cgc or the satellite component. in a first set of trials, the configuration sh b8 (see table xvii) has been tested over route 1. the service availabilities achieved with the different network configurations are: fig. 37. sh b8 on route 1—satellite only (upper left), terrestrial only (upper right) and code combining (below).

the results are visualized by coverage maps in figs. 36 38. the performances achieved over route 2 in sh b8 are (cid:129) satellite only: 97% of service availability (cid:129) terrestrial only: 74% of service availability (cid:129) code combining: 100% of service availability

the comparison over the route is depicted next, and the area where code combining improves the performance is emphasized.

d. comparison between high throughput and low throughput configurations

the flexibility in waveform configurations of dvb sh allows a trade off between service availability and throughput. under this viewpoint, we can compare the performance of configurations set in either high or low throughput modes. in particular, for sh a, we compare sh a1 (spectral efficiency: 0.666 bit/s/hz) vs. sh a3 (spectral efficiency: 1 bit/s/hz). in both cases, a long physical layer time interleaver is used, i.e. 11 seconds for sh a1 and 10 seconds for sh a3. when the cgc is available, the network is set in sfn mode. for sh b, we compare sh b1 (spectral efficiency: 0.666 bit/s/hz) vs. sh b8 (spectral efficiency: 1 bit/s/hz). in both cases, a long interleaver for the tdm part is used: 11 seconds for sh b1 and 9 seconds for sh b8. the results are summarized in table xviii.

the high throughput configurations pay their higher spectral efficiency with a reduced link margin, which turns is a loss of serice availability. again, the loss is more evident in those situaions where the receiver is challenged by the channel conditions, e.g. on route 1 with satellite only coverage. the gain of the lowhroughput configuration is evident in the part e of the route, i.e. where tree shadowing affects the received signal (see fig. 39).

e. role of antenna diversity fig. 39. comparison between the sh b trials on route 1—satellite only, sh b8 (high throughput) (left) and sh b1 (low throughput) (right).

table xviii summary of the results for different throughputs

the results represent test drives where two receivers have been used in parallel. one of them was configured in antenna diversity, and the other in the nominal single antenna configuation. in both cases the vehicular type of omni directional anennae were mounted on the vehicle roof.

fig. 40 summarizes the results obtained for the different routes (noted 1 and 2), in different network configurations (s: : hybrid coverage) and for different satellite only, sh modes. the esr5(20) enhancement due to the antenna diversity tends to be larger in challenging conditions, and especially in satellite only reception. a gain of up to 15% points in esr5(90) service availability has been measured in the configuration sh b#8 under satellite only coverage.

these results are consistent with others found in the literature where antenna gain has been measured in terms of c/n advanage . a similar c/n gain is translated into a different inrease of service availability due to the non linear behaviors of the esr5(20) versus c/n curves (see figs. 7, 9, 12). fig. 40. esr5(20) enhancement due to antenna diversity.

f. considerations on the performance in different environments

the trial results presented up to now concern the performance obtained in the overall route (either route 1 or 2) which is a composite of different environments. this sub section focuses on the analysis per environment for a satellite only coverage. to do so, the route 1 has been split in 5 parts, see fig. 41. the initial/final part of the route has been divided in two sub parts (to take into account the different traveling direction), parts a1/a2. the segments a1/a2 and b are essentially sub urban areas. c and d are representative of urban environment (high buildings and narrow streets). e zone is characterized by intermediate to high tree shadowed areas.

the results for different configurations in satellite only covrage are summarized in the table xix whereby the dvb sh configurations refer to table xvii. fig. 41. route 1 sliced per environment.

with respect to the class 1 solution (with a longer protection). class 2 interleaver provides a significant advantage in region e (tree shadowing) which matches well previous findings in simlations and laboratory tests. as expected there is an influence of the direction of driving in the results: relatively good perormance i.e. 70 78 % of esr5(20) fulfillment, is achieved in the urban area c where the predominant direction of driving is north south which is close to the satellite reception direction.

this paper reported an extensive set of results related to the performance of dvb sh receivers obtained through computer simulations, laboratory test and field trials. the results show the very good performance i.e. 90 % esr5(20) fulfillment rate of the dvb sh a and b configurations in satellite, terrestrial and hybrid modes of operations. simulations results are closely matched by laboratory measurements. the performance advanages of class 2 versus class 1 receivers have been quantified and appear important in low link conditions in particular over its lms environment. the impact of satellite amplifier nonlinearity has been quantified and it has been shown to be dependent on the sh profile (a or b) in case of single carrier per hpa operation. the difference vanishes when the satellite payload uses mpas operating in multi carrier conditions. also the hybrid network mode of operation and its important performance gain has been characterized by simulation and laboratory measurements. the s band field trials results have confirmed the dvb sh capabiliies to cope with lms and terrestrial environments achieving the target video quality of service with a moderate set of terrestrial repeaters and a medium satellite eirp. superior performance of class 2 receivers has been confirmed in the field in critical lms channel conditions. code combining in both single freuency network and multi frequency network has been fully validated.

the authors would like to acknowledge the support of sevral colleagues in their respective organizations, which made possible to obtain the results reported here. a particular thanks goes to solaris mobile ltd., the european space agency and mbi srl for their support to the pisa field trials. in addition, the support of mr. p. kelley, dvb ssp working group chairman is kindly acknowledged.

system specification for satellite services to handheld devices (sh) below 3ghz., etsi ts 102 585, european telecommunication stanards institute.

framing structure, channel coding and modulation for satellite serices to handheld devices (sh) below 3ghz, etsi ts 102 583, euopean telecommunication standards institute.

dvb sh implementation guidelines., etsi ts 102 584, european

guidelines for evaluation of radio transmission technologies for

commission of the european communities, directorate general telecommunications, information industries and innovation, "digital land mobile radio communications (final report)," 1989, pp. 135 147, (under the direction of m. failly). ana bolea alamanac received the masters degree in telecommunications engineering from the univerity of zaragoza, spain, in 1995, and the ph.d. degree from supaero, in toulouse, france in 2004.

from 1996 to 2001, she was with telefonica, madrid, spain. after her ph.d. she continued her work in the area of advanced digital communication techniques with the research and development department of thales alenia space in toulouse, france. in 2005, she joined esa's research and (estec), noordwijk, the technology center netherlands, as a communication system engineer in the rf payload and systems division where she focused on advanced mobile satellite communicaion systems design and optimization. in january 2011, she joined the future programs division in the telecommunications directorate of esa.

paolo burzigotti was born in italy in 1976. he reeived the masters degree in electronic engineering, major subject in telecommunications, from the uniersity of perugia, it, in 2001.

from 2001 to 2005, he was employed as communiation system engineer in space engineering s.p.a, (rome, it) in the digital technology department, where he worked on the development of digital reeiver and transmission system. his main research interest was on the design of algorithms for telecomunication digital systems via satellite and on feaibility analysis in hardware projects related to high rate and high order modlation modems. in 2006, he joined esa's research and technology center (estec), noordwijk, the netherlands, as a communication system engineer in the rf payload and systems division. his current interests are mainly related to advanced mobile satellite communication systems design and optimization.

michel cohen is graduated from ecole normale supérieure de saint cloud in physics and from the university (agrégation de physique).

after teaching physics, he spent four years at france telecom r&d as project manager in the signal processing field. he joined alcatel space (now thales alenia space) in 1989. in alcatel space, he has been involved as team leader and project manager in several projects. deeply involved in the globalstar and skybridge projects. he held the position of deputy managing director of system engineering department. the five last years, he has been working in alatel lucent, as system architecture senior director for the dvb sh mobile tv project.

riccardo de gaudenzi (m'88 sm'97) was born in italy in 1960. he received the doctor engineer deree (cum laude) in electronic engineering from the university of pisa, italy in 1985, and the ph.d. degree from the technical university of delft, the netherands in 1999.

from 1986 to 1988 he was with the european space agency (esa), stations and communications engineering department, darmstadt (germany) where he was involved in satellite telecommunicaion ground systems design and testing. in particular, he followed the development of two new esa's satellite tracking systems. in 1988, he joined esa's research and technology center (estec), noordwijk, the netherlands where in 2000 he has been appointed head of the commuication systems section and since 2005 he is head of the rf payload and systems division. the division is responsible for supporting the definition and