riccardo de gaudenzi, senior member, ieee, albert guill´en i f`abregas, member, ieee,

abstract— this paper investigates the performance of m ary amplitude phase shift keying (apsk) digital modulation over typical nonlinear satellite channels. the effect of the satellite noninearity is studied, and distortion prend post compensation techniques for coded apsk are presented. moreover, clock timing, signal amplitude and carrier phase recovery schemes are discussed. for the latter, a new class of non turbo decoder aided closed loop phase synchronizers featuring good performance and low complexity is studied. finally, an end to end coded apsk system simulator inclusive of the satellite channel model and synchronization sub systems is discussed and its performance compared to standard trellis coded qam concatenated with reed solomon codes, showing a remarkable gain in both power and spectral efficiency. coded apsk, recently selected for the new standard dvb s2 for digital video broadcasting and interactive broadband satellite services , is shown to represent a powernd spectral efficient solution for satellite nonlinear channels.

index terms— turbo codes, amplitude phase shift keying (apsk) modulation, bit interleaved coded modulation (bicm), coded modulation, nonlinear channels, phase synchronization, time synchronization, satellite communications.

t he strength of satellite communication systems lies

in their ability to efficiently broadcast digital multiedia information over very large areas . a notable exmple is the so called direct to home (dth) digital television broadcasting. satellite systems also provide a unique way to complement the terrestrial telecommunication infrastructure in scarcely populated regions. the introduction of multieam satellite antennas with adaptive coding and modulation (acm) schemes will allow an important efficiency increase for satellite systems operating at kur ka band . as a result, to maximize the efficient use of the scarce on board available power, the satellite high power amplifier (hpa) must be operated close to saturation, creating a highly nonlinear environment, in which efficient transmission of more than 3 bps/hz is a challenging task.

manuscript received february 16, 2004; revised november 11, 2005; accepted december 17,2005. the associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was k. narayanan.

is with the european space agency (esa estec),

noordwijk, the netherlands (email: rdegaude@xrsun0.estec.esa.nl).

a. guill´en i f`abregas was with european space agency (esa estec), noordwijk, the netherlands. he is currently with the institute for telecomunications research, university of south australia, mawson lakes, ausralia (email: albert.guillen@unisa.edu.au). past literature has extensively covered techniques to imrove highly spectral efficient modulations performance . however, this work typically refers to uncoded square qam constellations, results of lesser importance for nonlinear satellite channels. circular apsk modulations were already proposed thirty years ago in , where uncoded bit error rate bounds for several non band limited apsk sets were provided; the suitability of apsk for nonlinear channels was also made explicit, but concluded that for single carrier operation over nonlinear channel apsk performs worse than psk schemes. in the current paper we revert this conclusion.

the possibility of modulator pre compensation was briefly mentioned in . general techniques to mitigate the nonlinear distortion effects are well covered in the literature , , , . pre compensation techniques counteract the amplier distortion through constellation pre distortion at the transitter, while post compensation techniques mitigate nonlinear distortion effects at the demodulator side through nonlinear equalization and/or ad hoc decoder metric computation. in this paper we review the existing works and we discuss their applicability to apsk.

we also consider clock timing, amplitude and phase recovry schemes, with the final aim of designing an all digital lowomplexity high performance demodulator for coded apsk modulations. in an all digital trellis coded 16 qam demodulator was studied. in that paper nonlinearity compenation was limited to the demodulator trellis decoder, whose metric calculation was modified to take into account the major satellite memoryless nonlinear distortion effects. joint iterative decoding and parameter estimation can be performed by adding the parameter variables in the message passing iterative decoding algorithm , . however, each parameter to be estimated in the iterative loop slows the convergence of the iterative decoder and changes its properties, thus significantly increasing the overall complexity of the demodulator. in this work, we consider low complexity closed loop modules for timing, amplitude and phase synchronization, with subptimum yet good performance.

this paper is organized as follows. sect. ii describes the system model and the main effects of the nonlinear amplifier. sect. iii briefly describes apsk signal sets and presents an optimization procedure based on mutual information. in sect. iv we review the prend post compensation techniques against nonlinear distortion, and discuss their applicability to coded apsk systems. sect. v describes the proposed low complexity demodulator, in particular the clock timing, de gaudenzi et al.: performance analysis of turbo coded apsk modulations over nonlinear satellite channels

amplitude and carrier phase estimation schemes. sect. vi gives a brief description of the system we use as benchmark for comparison, and shows some numerical results that illustrate the benefits of the proposed system over today standard. main conclusions and findings are finally summarized in sect. vii.

we consider a communication system composed of a digital modulator, a square root raised cosine (srrc) band limiting filter, and a nonlinear high power amplifier (hpa) with typical travelling wave tube amplifier (twta) characteristic for a satellite in ku/ka band. this model is representative of a satellite bent pipe transponder with uplink noise negligible compared to the downlink. due to the tight signal bandimiting the impact of the satellite input and output analog filters is assumed negligible. the baseband equivalent of the transmitted signal at time t, st (t) is given by:

where p is the signal power, x(k) is the k th transmitted symol, drawn from a complex valued apsk signal constellation x , with |x | = m , described in detail shortly hereafter, pt (t) is the srrc transmission filter impulse response, and ts is the symbol duration (in seconds), corresponding to a channel use. the coded modulation spectral efficiency r is the number of information bits divided by the modulator baud rate, i. e., r = r log2 m , r being the coding rate and m the modulation cardinality.

the signal st (t) passes through an amplifier (hpa) oprated close to the saturation point. in this region, the hpa shows non linear characteristics that induce phase and amlitude distortions to the transmitted signal. the amplifier is modeled by a memoryless non linearity, with an output signal sa(t) at time t given by:

where we have implicitly defined f (a) and φ(a) as the am/am and am/pm characteristics of the amplifier for a signal with instantaneous signal amplitude a. the signal amplitude is the instantaneous complex envelope, so that the baseband signal is decomposed as st (t) = |st (t)|ejφ(st (t)). for the numerical examples in the following we will consider the am/am and am/pm characteristics shown in fig. 1.

we introduce the parameter eb/n0|sat defined as the ratio between the transmitted energy per bit when the amplifier is driven at saturation by a continuous wave (cw) carrier and the noise power spectral density at the demodulator input . note that the sub fix "sat" refers to hpa saturation. the signal to noise ratio at the demodulator input eb/n0|inp is reduced by the output back off (obo, in db) with respect to the value in a system operating with a single constant envelope signal at amplifier saturation: 0 70

hpa normalized input power (db)

fig. 1. reference ka band twt amplifier. am/am (crosses) and am/pm (circles) characteristics of the ) s e e r g e d (

by an amount d with respect to an ideal linear awgn chanel. this quantity depends on the hpa distortion and hence on the ibo/obo characteristic (see fig. 1). with this degradation, the effective demodulator input eb/n0, eb/n0|eff, is given by:

with eq. (4) we can find an optimum hpa operating point that minimizes eb/n0|sat. this point represents the best tradeff between the increasing power loss (obo) related to the higher ibo and the reduction of the distortion (d) due to the improved linearity experienced by a larger ibo.

iii. constellation optimization in awgn m apsk constellations are composed of nr concentric rings, each with uniformly spaced psk points. the signal constellation points x are complex numbers, drawn from a set x given by: ⎧

(ring nr) (5) where we have defined n(cid:4), r(cid:4) and θ(cid:4) as the number of points, the radius and the relative phase shift corresponding to the (cid:3) th ring respectively. we will nickname such modulations as n1 +. . .+nnr−apsk. fig. 2 depicts the 4+12nd 4+12+16psk modulations with quasi gray mapping. in particular, for next generation broadband systems , , the constellation sizes of interest are |x | = 16 and |x | = 32, with nr = 2 and nr = 3 rings respectively. in general, we consider that x is normalized in energy, i.e., e[|x|2] = 1, which implies that the radii r(cid:4) are normalized such that (cid:4) = 1. notice also that the radii r(cid:4) are ordered, so that r1 < . . . < rnr . (cid:0) (cid:2)

we are interested in finding an apsk constellation, defined by the parameters ρ = (ρ1, . . . , ρnr) and φ = (φ1, . . . , φnr ), such that a given cost function f (x ) reaches a maximum. rather than the classical minimum euclidean distance, mutual information allows us to optimize the performance at the coded system eb/n0 operating point. we assume a linear awgn channel; robustness against nonlinear distortion will be achieved in a second step through exploitation of constelation pre compensation.

the mutual information (assuming equiprobable symbols) for a given signal set x provides the maximum transmission rate (in bits/channel use) at which error free transmission is possible with such signal set, and is given by (e.g. ),

it was found in that the maximum mutual information does not depend on φ. therefore, the optimization can be done by simply finding the ρ2 that maximizes the mutual inormation. this result was found to hold true also for the other constellations and hence, in the following, mutual information optimization results do not account for φ. fig. 3 compares the mutual information of optimized 16 apsk modulations versus 16 psk and 16 qam. table i summarizes the optimized 16nd 32 apsk parameters for various coding rates. more 3.5

fig. 3. mutual information for the optimized apsk signal constellations versus qam and psk.

optimized constellation parameters for 16 ary and 32 ary

details on constellation optimization and code design can be found in . these values are used in the dvb s2 standard .

iv. satellite channel distortion compensation

the amplifier non linearity has two the very constellation is distorted as major effects. first, the constellation points are mapped by the hpa nonlinear characteristic to a different point (amplitude, phase). furhermore, the relative positions of the constellation points change. as discussed in sect. iv a.1 this impairment can be reduced by ad hoc static pre compensation at the transitter, or post compensation at the receiver. second, interymbol interference (isi) appears at the receiver as the hpa, although memoryless, is driven by a signal with controlled isi due to the presence of the modulator srrc filter. this leads to an overall nonlinear channel with memory. as a consequence, the demodulator srrc is not matched anymore to the incoming signal. this issue is to be tackled mainly with a pre equalization at the modulator , or equalization at the demodulator or a combination of the two techniques (see sect. iv a.2 iv b). generally speaking, simulated histogram of the transmitted signal envelope power for

although results presented in sect. iii indicated a slight superiority of 6+10 apsk, for nonlinear transmission over an amplifier, 4+12 apsk is preferable to 6+10 apsk because the presence of more points in the outer ring allows to maximize the hpa dc power conversion efficiency. it is better to reduce the number of inner points, as they are transmitted at a lower power, which corresponds a lower dc efficiency the hpa power conversion efficiency is monotonic with the input power drive up to its saturation point. fig. 4 shows the distribution of the transmitted signal envelope for 16am, 4+12 apsk, 6+10 apsk, 5+11 apsk, and 16 psk; the shaping filter is a square root raised cosine (srrc) with roll off factor α = 0.35. as we observe, the 4+12 apsk enveope is more concentrated around the outer ring amplitude than 16 qam and 6+10 psk, being remarkably close to the 16sk case. this shows that the selected constellation represents a good trade off between 16 qam and 16 psk, with error performance close to 16 qam, and resilience to nonlinearity close to 16 psk. therefore, 4+12+apsk is preferable to the rest of 16 ary modulations considered. similar advantages have been observed for 32 apsk compared to 32 qam.

1) static distortion compensation: the simplest approach for counteracting the hpa nonlinear characteristic is to modify the complex valued constellation points at the modulator side. thanks to the multiple ring nature of the apsk constellation, pre compensation is easily done by a simple modification of the parameters ρ(cid:4) and φ(cid:4). the known am/am and am/pm hpa characteristics are exploited in order to obtain a good replica of the desired signal constellation geometry after the hpa, as if it had not suffered any distortion. this can be simply obtained by artificially increasing the relative radii ρ(cid:4) and modifying the relative phases φ(cid:4) at the modulator side. the calculation of the pre distorted constellation parameters can be made with the technique described in for the computation of the distorted constellation center of mass (centroids) seen at the demodulator matched filter output. with knowledge of the satellite link characteristics, the static pre compensation parameters can be calculated off line, in the following steps: 1) generation of s blocks of w symbols over which the symbol matched filter (smf) centroids are computed (transmission in the absence of white noise); 2) computation of the error signal at the end of each block; 3) pre distorted constellation point update. the latter task can be readily achieved through an iterative least mean square (lms) type of algorithm illustrated by the following equations:

l(n) where the index n refers to the constellation point, indicates the conditioning to the constellation point n, s refers to the iteration step of the algorithm, y(k) represents the kh smf output complex sample, x(n) represents the apsk complex constellation reference point, r(n) (s) are the modulus and the phase of the smf output complex n th centroid computed at step s, is x(n) pre(s) the pre distorted n th constellation point computed at step s, γr and γφ the adapation steps for the pre distorted constellation point modulus and the phase respectively. (s) and θ(n) c c

2) = r2. concerning the phase, it is possible to pre correct for effect of the hpa on the phase hpa between inner and outer rings through a simple change in the relative phase shift by 2 = φ2 + δφ, with δφ = φ(r(cid:5) φ(cid:5) 1). these operations can be readily implemented in the digital modulator by simly modifying the reference constellation parameters ρ(cid:5), φ(cid:5), with no hardware complexity impact or out of band emission increase at the linear modulator output. the compensation effort is shifted into the modulator side, allowing the use of an optimal demodulator/decoder for awgn channels even when the amplifier is close to saturation. the signal at the modulator output is then 2) − φ(r(cid:5)

k=0 (12) fig. 5. 4+12 psk signal constellation: a) modulator output roll off factor 0.35 with pre compensation (ρ2 = 3.7, δφ = 27 degrees); b) demodulator srrc filter output noiseless scatter diagram for 16 apsk in the nonlinear channel for ibo=2 db, roll off factor 0.35 with pre compensation (ρ2 = 3.7, δφ = 27 degrees).

receiver matched filter is shown in fig. 5 b for 16 apsk with ibo=2 db. for clarity, the scatter diagram at the smf has been obtained in the absence of awgn. despite the strong channel nonlinearity the center of mass, corresponding to the scattered diagram, closely follows the optimum 4+12 apsk constellation, for which the optimum parameters are ρ2 = 2.7 and φ = 0. but not in a modification of the am/am, am/pm characeristics shape. the limited gain variations are compensated by the satellite transponder automatic level control (alc) device, thus off line pre compensation has a long term value. if required, the compensated parameters can be adapted to track larger slow variations in hpa characteristic due to aging. 2) dynamic distortion compensation: the dynamic preompensation approach by sari considers not only the current constellation symbol, as done in the case of static preompensation, but also for q symbols before and after. in genral for m qam modulation the possible pre distortions are now m 2q+1. similar to the static pre compensation described before, the pre distorter complex values can be obtained offine minimizing the minimum squared error (mse) between the ideal constellation and the noiseless points measured after the demodulator symbol matched filter. this can be achieved through an extension of the methodology described for the static approach. in this case, the number of updating equations for m qam is m 2q+1 which can be reduced to m 2q+1/4 exploiting the m qam quadrant symmetry . for apsk the memory requirement can be further reduced to 3m q/16. the main drawback of this technique is the amount of time required to compute the pre distortion coefficients and the memory required which grows rapidly with the constellation and memory parameters (m , q). it should also remarked that the dynamic pre compensation is less effective than the static one when more than one carrier is passing through the same hpa. this is because the uncorrelated intermodulation noise among carriers will dominate over the isi thus making the dynamic pre compensation ineffective.

b. dynamic post compensation at the receiver

an alternative approach to dynamic pre distortion techiques is represented by demodulator equalization. two main approaches are revisited in the following, namely linear and nonlinear equalization. the typical linear equalization correponds to the case of a decision directed complex agc (also called vector tracker) see appendix ii of . it was observed in that linear equalization does not provide any significant improvement over nonlinear channels.

the post compensation in the (trellis) decoder metric calcuation was proposed in . in that work, the metric computer for the tcm decoder used the distorted constellation x (cid:5) as reference constellation, and the metric corresponding to the distorted constellation point x(cid:5) ∈ x is given by,

where ∝ indicates proportionality and the x(cid:5) ∈ x are the centroids of the distorted constellation at the matched filter output.

a somewhat more complex approach is adaptive nonlinear equalization, based on a volterra series expansion , where it is shown to provide considerable advantages for psk modulations in terms of isi reduction. furthermore, it also allows to reduce the optimum operating ibo, thus improving the hpa utilization. however, it is expected that this advantage will be more pronounced for 16 qam than for double ring (13) apsk with pre compensation, as this case is already very close to the optimal linear channel performance. a second drawback is that the improvement will be somewhat masked at the low snr typical of powerful encoded transmission. this conjecture about the limited improvement provided by a non linear equalizer for heavily coded modulation will be substantiated in the following (see sect. vi).

v. demodulation and synchronization issues

in this section we will describe demodulation and synchroization issues concerning the design of a complete digital demodulator for the coded apsk system. in particular we will investigate simple timing, amplitude and phase estimation algorithms able to operate at the low snrs corresponding to a near shannon coded modulation.

the non data aided (nda) symbol clock estimation scheme proposed by gardner can be applied, since it works without any data knowledge and exhibits very satisfacory performance even at low signal to noise ratios. extraction of the k th normalized sampling epoch (cid:10)k is performed recurively via the following "closed loop" equation,

where eτ (k) is the timing error detector (ted) function

and y(k) are the symbol matched filter output samples. as is apparent, the error detector signal is obtained using the on time interpolated sample y(k) (cid:2) y[(k + εk)ts] and the late/early samples y(k + 1 2 ) shifted by half the symbol time. the updating step size γτ is related to the equivalent one sided loop noise bandwidth blτ as follows,

where aτ is the slope at the equilibrium point of the average ted characteristic (s curve). as observed in , the timing discriminator performance is invariant to carrier phase, so that timing information can be extracted without prior acquisition of the carrier recovery loop. as for the digital timing interolator, we employed the cubic interpolator described in and .

the nda automatic gain control (agc) algorithm for the acquisition phase described in is used, for which the the (k+1) th value of the variable gain ck+1 is derived recursively as: (cid:3) ck|y(k)| − a1 standard decision directed (dd) schemes exploiting trellis decoder tentative decisions, as in , cannot be adopted because of the long intrinsic decoding delay which will cause instabilities in the carrier phase estimation loop. the approach pursued in exploits the decisions of the inner convoluional decoder and the hard decisions for the remaining coded symbols to wipe off data modulation in the phase estimation process. however, the symbol decisions provided in this way are not expected to be significantly better than hard decisions at the decoder input considering the very low operating snr typical of a turbo decoder, and the weakness of the inner code (accumulator, 2 state rate 1 convolutional code). in order to keep complexity within reasonable limits, and due to longer convergence delays of the joint phase detector and decoder, we do not consider iterative phase estimators as , .

in we showed that a four quadrant decision directed (dd) (4q dd or 4q slicing) approach, consisting in partitionng the i q plane in four quadrants as for qpsk modulation and taking hard decisions at symbols level, is a workable approach for the phase recovery of 16 apsk and 16 qam modulations. however, the estimator suffered from a phase error jitter floor due to pattern noise, an artifact absent in qpsk operation. the irreducible jitter variance for 16 apsk is computed as:

1 72w (18) where x (cid:2) represents the set of constellation points in the first quadrant of the complex plane, x(cid:5) is one of the elements of x (cid:2) and w is the phase estimator averaging time in symbols. the quadrant decision approach is somewhat fragile against thermal noise due to the vicinity of some of the 16 apsk constellation points to the decision region boundaries. the ratio between the simulated decision directed (dd) 16 apsk phase standard deviation and the modulation constrained cramer rao (mcr) bound is about 3.55 at es/n0 = 10 db, while for 16 qam the same ratio is reduced to 1.92. this problem can be overcome by narrowing the loop bandwidth when possible. however, in the presence of imporant phase noise contributions originating from the consumer receiver radio frequency front end, the narrow loop noise bandwidth reduction will generate cycle slips. furthermore, by doing so, the maximum residual frequency error that can be tolerated by the phase recovery loop is also reduced. thus excessive narrowing the loop noise bandwidth to combat the phase jitter should be avoided. 1 4w σ2 4q dd = arg{x(cid:2)} − =

in the following, we propose a general class of p th power closed loop nda phase synchronizers for apsk. the corresponding block diagram is shown in fig. 6. compared to the 4q dd scheme an p th order nonlinearity followed by a θp phase rotation is introduced before the quadrant slicing device. the proposed phase error detector algorithm has the following form: fig. 6. apsk generalized phase tracker block diagram.

fig. 7. effect of the cubic nonlinearity on the 4+12 apsk constellation.

the error signal eφ(k) is then used to update the first order phase loop phase according to φ(k) = φ(k − 1) − γφ eφ(k), where the loop gain is related to the bandwidth blφ by the classical relation,

the dd phase discriminators s curve aφ depends on the actual es/n0 ; the effective loop noise bandwidth depends in turn on the operating es/n0. following , it is common practice to compute the discriminator slope aφ|es/n0=+∞ and the corresponding loop bandwidth for es/n0 = ∞, and refer in the simulations to blφ ts(∞) = blφts|es/n0=∞.

the 4q dd scheme described in is obtained by setting p = 1 and θp = 0 in fig. 6. because of the simplified 4qd approach the phase estimator implementation is simpler than a truly dd scheme for 16 apsk and decisions are insensitive to possible signal amplitude estimation errors. the operations performed during this estimator suggest an alternaive scheme that keeps a similar complexity, while improving its performance. raising a 4+12 apsk constellation to the 3rd power (in the complex domain), the original 4+12 apsk constellation transforms into a qpsk one. it is easy to see that the twelve external ring points collapse into a qpsk 0.15 /n e s =10 db 0

simulated apsk phase error detector s curve for es/n0 =

constellation, with amplitude 4r3 2, while the internal points remain on a qpsk constellation with amplitude r3 1. for typical 4+12 apsk parameters the distance between the two rings is largely increased. this process is illustrated in fig. 7, where the input 4+12 apsk signal constellation is depicted, together with the constellation after the cubic nonlinearity.

a simple 4q dd (quadrant slicer type) closed loop phase estimator operating on the outer qpsk ring can be efficiently applied to the cubic nonlinearity output. this scheme dubbed c 4q dd is obtained by setting p = 3, θp = 0 in fig. 6. the main scheme drawback is related the thermal noise terms enhancement at low signal to noise ratios due to the cubic nonlinearity. for 32 apsk a fourth power device transforms the constellation into an outer ring qpsk constellation with amplitude 4r3 3, a middle ring composed of 2(ejπ/3, −1, e−jπ/3)] and single inner point three points [4r3 with amplitude −2r3 3. a phase shift θp = π/4 is also required to get the right constellation orientation after the nonlinearity for the slicer correct operation. therefore for 32 apsk the 100

figs. 8, 9, and 10 depict the simulated apsk phase error detector s curves for es/n0 = ∞, 15, 10 db for 4+12psk 4q dd, 4+12 apsk c 4q dd, and 4+12+16 apsk f 4q dd schemes respectively. it should be remarked the regular s curve sawtooth shape of the c 4q dd in absence of noise with an unstable lock point at ± 15 degrees correspondng to the outer ring phase ambiguity (360/12=30). the more irregular shape of the 4q dd phase detector of fig. 8 can be explained by the simultaneous presence of 4+12 apsk inner and outer ring points which show different angular distance from the slicer boundaries. this does not happen for the c dd ped for which inner ring points collapse in the origin. for both peds noise impact results in the classical smoothing of the saw tooth shape due to the decision errors. it should be remarked that in the absence of thermal noise the s curve slope of the c 4q dd scheme is enhanced by a factor of about 3.8 compared to the 4q dd one. 32 apsk results are shown in fig. 10: it is remarked that the narrower s curve stable region due to the higher constellation order. nonetheless ped sensitivity to phase error appears very good.

fig. 11 illustrates the phase error (jitter) standard deviation obtained by simulation for 4+12 apsk and 4+12+16 apsk and the 4q dd, c 4q dd and f 4q dd phase estimators. these results indicate that the c 4q dd ped provides a remarkable phase error standard deviation improvement factor of about 3 at es/n0 = 10 db compared to the 4q dd scheme of . at es/n0 = 20 db the improvement corresponds to almost one order of magnitude. as we observe, a phase jitter standard deviation of about 0.4 degrees can be achieved at es/n0 = 10 db for blφts(∞) = 10−4. performance results for 32 apsk using the f 4q dd ped are also remarkably good. it should be recalled that 32 apsk will typically operate at higher es/n0 than 4+12 apsk.

in principle the proposed phase estimators can also work in feed forward mode by performing a moving average of the complex error signal contained in the argument of the imaginary function in the phase error expression above, and then extracting the complex signal phase. however, similarly to what is seen in figs. 8 10, the discriminator s curve shape is dependent on the actual es/n0. while the shape has no major impact on the feedback configuration (apart from the above mentioned loop gain changes), for the feed forward estimator the non linear s curve characteristic and its slope dependencies on the snr implies a biased estimator for nonero phase errors. this major drawback, due to low snr quadrant decision errors, renders impractical the exploitation of the feed forward phase estimator scheme.

vi. numerical results

in this section we describe some numerical results that illustrate the performance of coded apsk modulations with the receiver elements described in sect. v. as a benchmark we briefly describe some results based on concatenated reed solomon and trellis coder. when not stated otherwise we assume that roll off factor of the srrc filter is 0.35.

the following prend post compensation configurations have been investigated: 1) "classical" 1 16 qam with linear equalization; 2) "classical" 16 qam with a third order 30 tap volterra nonlinear equalizer, with lms linear adaptation step αlin = 10−3 and a nonlinear adaptation step αnonlin = 10−6 (see , , for details on practical imlementation); 3) 4+12 apsk with linear equalization; 4) 4+12 apsk with nonlinear equalization ; 5) 16 qam with linear equalizaion and modified tc decoder metrics ; 6) 16 qam with nonlinear equalization and modified tc decoder metrics ; 7) 4+12 apsk with static pre compensation and linear equalization; 8) 4+12 apsk with static pre compensation and nonlinear equalization .

a. end to end simulator description

the system under consideration is depicted in fig. 12. the sequence of steps in the transmitter is as follows. the binary information data bits ak, at rate rb, enter a serial to parallel device (s/p) generating three parallel streams at rate rb/3. an encoder with rate r = 3/4 generates four parallel binary symbol streams at rate r(cid:5) s = rb/3, that are mapped through a gray mapping onto the apsk constellation generator. the modulator i q streams are at symbol rate rs = rb/3. the i q multilevel digital pulse stream is then passed to the two baseband srrc filters and i q modulated at rf. in case of the nonlinear channel the passband real signal then drives the hpa whose model has been described in sect. ii. white noise representing the downlink satellite channel is then added.

the passband demodulator input signal is i q demodulated to baseband using standard analog or digital techniques. the i streams are then asynchronously sampled at ns = ts/tclock samples/symbol. in practical implementations the number of samples/symbol ns depends on the characteristic of the antiliasing filter contained in the i q demodulator front end. these samples, assumed for simplicity to be not quantized, are then passed to the receiver srrc matched filters. the srrc filter outputs are then sub sampled at two samples per symbol (on time and early) by a digital interpolator driven by the timing error detector unit. the output symbol stream is then split into on time and early samples through a simple s/p converter. both streams are used to derive the timing error information. the on time one sample per symbol stream then srrc filter cos ω0t

phase error detector linear

nonlinear equalizer decoder ak d

decoder of ci (cid:2) 1 c

enters the digital vector tracker performing only amplitude estimation. a dedicated phase error detector is present at the output of the digital agc. if required, qam frequency estimators are applicable to our case . the turbo decoder represents the last demodulator block.

b. trellis coded apsk

we first consider a standard trellis coded modulation (tcm) scheme over apsk modulations with set partitioning or quasiet partitioning binary labeling rules. the performance of the 16 qam demodulator in the linear channel, including ampliude, timing and phase estimation subsystem degradations, is very close to the analytical upper bound in awgn , . for the 16 state code the coding gain of coded 16 qam with respect to uncoded 8 psk at pe = 10−5 is about 4.4 db. for quasi error free (qef) performance, e.g. ber on the order of 10−10, we consider a concatenated scheme for which the outer code is the reed solomon code rs (188, 204) and the inner code is the tcm. then, the inner decoder ber is in the order of 2·10−4 . the selected 16 state optimal trellis code for 16 qam provides performance very close to that of the 64tate binary pragmatic trellis code selected for the dvb sng standard . fig. 13. simulated ber for tcm 16 qam and 4+12 apsk in the nonlinear channel: 16 state code, ibo= 3 db, roll off factor=0.35.

we used the approach described in , with the following parameters: agc adaptation step γα = 10−3, symbol clock estimator loop noise bandwidth blτ = 10−3 and phase estimator loop noise bandwidth blθ(∞) = 5 · 10−4.

computer simulations for the 16 state tcm are reported in fig. 13. one should consider a required trellis decoder output ber of 2 · 10−4 to find the corresponding eb/n0|sat. the proposed 16 apsk constellation with pre compensation achieves a gain of 3.1 db over conventional 16 qam with linear complex equalization (amplitude and phase). the trellis coded 16 qam performs slightly better than the double ring 16 apsk scheme proposed over the awgn linear channel . however, in the nonlinear channel, simulation results demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed 16psk modulation. notice that at the ber of interest, the perormance gap between the optimal pre compensated 16 apsk and its non optimal counterpart, is much less than that for optimal and non optimal post compensated 16 qam, demontrating once again the inherent robustness of the proposed schemes over nonlinear channels. at the same time while static simple centralized pre compensation for 16 apsk can still provide about 0.5 db performance improvement, decentralized nonlinear equalization at the demodulator, despite its higher complexity, yields only marginal improvement.

we now report some results obtained by computer simuation for a turbo coded apsk system with bit interleaved coded modulation (bicm). the pragmatic approach of bicm allows for a good coupling between such optimized apsk modulations with powerful binary turbo codes, due to its inherent flexibility for multiple rate transmission , . in particular, we study the serial turbo code devised in with outer code co the 16 states rate ro = 3/4 convolutional code, and inner code ci the 2 states ri = 1 recursive convolutional code (accumulator). we consider frame transmission, with 16384 information bits per frame. the corresponding spectral efficiency is r = 3 bit/s/hz. we do not perform demapping 10 −1

fig. 14. rate r =3/4 turbo coded simulated ber of 16 qam and 16 apsk in the awgn channel and the nonlinear channel with ibo= 2 db, roll off factor=0.35, clock timing and carrier phase recovery.

iterations, and we consider gray and quasi gray labelings , . the following demodulator synchronizer settings have been adopted throughout this section: γα = 10−3, blτ = 10−3, blφ = 5 ·10−5. as for trellis coded modulation we used a third order timing interpolator. if not specified, the number of decoding iterations is set to 10. fig. 14 shows the performance of such turbo coded apsk system over a nonlinear satellite channel with ibo = 2db. for the sake of completeness, we provide also results for the linear awgn channel, with and without the nda synchronizer.

we first observe that in the awgn channel, qef perforance gain is about 1.65 db with respect to the 16 states tcm. notice also, that due to the concatenation with the rs code, the transmission rate corresponding to the tcm is reduced approximately by a about 8 %. this amounts to a total gain of about 2.0 db, for an increase in complexity of a factor 20 40.

due to the marginal gain offered by nonlinear volterra equalization for the case of tcm, we did not consider it for the turbo coded apsk. the ibo operating point was optimized by simulation, as shown in , . the eb/n0 was selected in the middle of the waterfall ber region to allow for capturing the ber variation. clearly optimization cannot be performed at pb = 10−10 but the current working point hardly differs from the qef in terms of snr. the decoder input snr was computed based on the effective demodulator input eb/n0 previously defined (see eqn. (3)) [eb/n0]eff . results corresponding to the ber performance with the optimal ibo = 2 db, are shown in figure 14. thanks to the combination of a powerful turbo code and a robust 16 apsk modulation we can operate over a typical satellite nonlinear channel for qef performance at only 1.3 db obo with a degradation with respect to the linear channel of only 0.9 db and an operating [eb/n0]inp = 6.9 db or [eb/n0]sat = 8.2 db. this shall be compared to the [eb/n0]sat = 13.1 db required by conventional tc 16 qam over nonlinear satellite channels. this represents an improvement of about 5 db 8 in power and 8 % in spectral efficiency compared to the conventional tc 16 qam representing today's baseline for high speed satellite links. the adoption of the more complex dynamic pre distortion technique with memory q = 5 brings an extra gain of about 0.8 db in terms of eb/n0|sat at the optimum operating point corresponding now to ibo = 1 db.

extensive analysis and simulations for coded apsk moduations, with particular emphasis on its applicability to satellite broadband communications have been presented in this paper. the impact of typical satellite nonlinearities and techniques to counteract their impact on the demodulator performance has been analyzed. also simple yet effective techniques for digital demodulator synchronization recovery have been devised and their performance analyzed. it is shown that coded apsk with simple digital pre distortion techniques based on lookp tables can achieve very good performance with satellite hpa driven at saturation (16 apsk) or with limited back off (32 apsk). the simple digital algorithms for agc, clock and phase recovery are shown to cause very small demodulator imairment compared to theoretical performance. the proposed turbo coded apsk scheme is shown to provide remarkable advantages in terms of power saving when used over typical satellite nonlinear channels.

for the case of carrier phase estimation, we have proposed a new class of closed loop non data aided (nda) synchronizers for apsk modulations and evaluated some of their properties (s curves, phase jitter). we show that the new apsk phase synchronizers show no phase jitter floor due to pattern noise. we finally evaluate the overall performance of the proposed turbo coded apsk demodulator by means of an end to end computer simulator, and we show an improvement of about 5 db in power and 8 % in spectral efficiency compared to conventional trellis coded 16 qam. s. benedetto, e. biglieri, and v. castellani, digital transmission theory.

v. lottici and m. luise, "carrier phase recovery for turbo coded linear modulations," in proc. ieee int. conference on communications (icc'02), vol. 3.

f. m. gardner, "a bpsk/qpsk timing error detector for sampled

——, "interpolation in digital modems part i: fundamentals," ieee

l. erup, f. m. gardner, and r. harris, "interpolation in digital modems implementation and performance," ieee trans. commun.,

c. langlais and m. h´elard, "phase carrier recovery for turbo codes over a satellite link with the help of tentative decisions," in proc. 2nd intl. symposium on turbo codes and applications 2000, p. 439.

u. mengali and a. n. d'andrea, synchronization techniques for digital

receivers. new york: plenum press, 1997.