performance analysis of multi antenna hybrid satellite terrestrial relay networks in the presence of interference

kang an, min lin, member, ieee, tao liang, jun bo wang, member, ieee, jiangzhou wang, senior member,

abstract—the integration of cooperative transmission into satellite networks is regarded as an effective strategy to inrease the energy efficiency as well as the coverage of satellite communications. this paper investigates the performance of an amplify and forward (af) hybrid satellite terrestrial relay network (hstrn), where the links of the two hops undergo shadowed rician and rayleigh fading distributions, respectively. by assuming that a single antenna relay is used to assist the signal transmission between the multi antenna satellite and multintenna mobile terminal, and multiple interferers corrupt both the relay and destination, we first obtain the equivalent end tond signal to interference plus noise ratio (sinr) of the system. then, an approximate yet very accurate closed form expression for the ergodic capacity of the hstrn is derived. the analytical lower bound expressions are also obtained to efficiently evaluate the outage probability (op) and average symbol error rate (aser) of the system. furthermore, the asymptotic op and aser expressions are developed at high signal to noise ratio (snr) to reveal the achievable diversity order and array gain of the considered hstrn. finally, simulation results are provided to validate of the analytical results, and show the impact of various parameters on the system performance.

index terms—hybrid satellite terrestrial network, amplify

land mobile satellite (lms) systems have been widely applied in scenarios such as navigation, broadcasting, rescue, and disaster relief, due to their potential to provide wide coverage and achieve high data rate transmission. however, the

this work is supported by the national natural science foundation of china under grants 61271255, 61471392, 61571115 and 61501507, the natural science foundation of jiangsu province under grant bk20131068, and the open research fund of national mobile communications research laboratory in southeast university (no. 2012d15).

k. an is with the college of communications engineering, pla university

of science and technology, nanjing, china (e mail: ankang@nuaa.edu.cn).

m. lin is with the pla university of science and technology, nanjing, china, and also with the national mobile communications research laboraory, southeast university, nanjing, china (e mail: linmin63@163.com).

t. liang is with nanjing telecommunication technology institute, nanjing,

j. b. wang is with national mobile communications research laboratory,

southeast university, nanjing, china (e mail: jbwang@seu.edu.cn).

j. z. wang is with school of engineering and digital arts, university of

y. huang is with the school of information science and engineering,

is with the center for pervasive communications and computing, university of california, irvine, ca 92697, usa (e mail: swindle@uci.edu). obstacles and shadowing between the satellite and terrestrial user may result in the masking effect, which makes a line of sight (los) communication difficult to be maintained . relay transmissions, in which a relay forwards the received signal from a source to an intended destination, has atracted significant attention in various wireless communication systems, since they can increase reliability and throughput under given power or bandwidth constraints. a novel network architecture referred as the hybrid satellite terrestrial relay network (hstrn) has been proposed to exploit both advantages to significantly enhance system performance (e.g. ).

a. background and motivation

substantial effort has been devoted to investigating the perormance of hstrns by employing various relay protocols, such as amplify and forward (af) and decode and forward (df). by assuming maximal ratio combining (mrc) at the destination, the authors of studied the average symbol error rate (aser) of hstrn with an af relaying protocol, and an af based hybrid satellite terrestrial free space optical (fso) cooperative system was studied in , in which the asymptotic aser behavior was investigated. in , the authors have considered the applicability of multi satellite multiple input multiple output (mimo) communications by employing dualatellite 2×2 mimo channels where each satellite is equipped with a single antenna. moreover, the outage probability (op) performance comparison of hstrns with fixed relaying (fr) and selection relaying (sr) protocols was presented in . the research in was mainly focused on scenarios where all the nodes are equipped with a single antenna. however, since multi antenna techniques exhibit a significant advantage in achieving high system capacity and energy efciency , cases involving satellites with multiple anennas have recently received significant attention . when channel state information (csi) is available, a practical stratgy among a variety of multi antenna techniques is beamformng (bf) due to its low implementation complexity . the work of has analyzed the performance of multiple antenna satellite communication systems in one hop scenarios, and derived expressions for the ergodic capacity, op and aser. extensions of to cases with estimation errors at the desination can be found in . since relay transmissions have proved to be an effective approach in enhancing the throughput 1

and coverage of satellite communications, the authors of have investigated the performance of relay based multiple antenna hstrns with beamforming (bf). specifically, in , the performance of a multiple antenna hstrn with both af and df protocols has been analyzed by deriving exact closed form expressions for op and aser. in , the performance of beamforming in af based hstrns with multiple antenna terrestrial relays and destinations has been studied, and both analytical and asymptotic aser expressions have been derived. moreover, has investigated df based satellite relaying with a multi antenna terrestrial source and destination, and extensions to the af based scenarios can be found in . by considering two way hstrns with multiple antennas at the relay, an approximate aser expression based on moment generating functions (mgf) was presented in . the work of investigated the effect of antenna correlation on the performance of multiple antenna hstrns and provided analytical expressions for op, aser, and ergodic capacity.

although the aforementioned research has significantly imroved the performance and benefits of hstrns, this work has assumed the ideal case of no co channel interference (cci), which is unrealistic in practical wireless systems. in recent years, a great deal of research has focused on the performance of conventional terrestrial systems in the presence of cci over rayleigh or nakagami m fading channels . due to the reuse of spectrum resources in practice, the major challenge facing hybrid satellite terrestrial networks is the problem of interference from inter component and/or intraomponent networks. while first investigated the aser performance of hstrns with cci at the destination for the single antenna scenario, the ergodic capacity, op, and aser have not been studied in the case that the satellite and terrestrial user have multiple antennas with cci corrupting both the relay and destination nodes.

in this paper, we consider a multi antenna af hstrn with multiple interferers at both the terrestrial relay and destination, where the source relay link undergoes shadowedician fading while the relay destination link experiences rayleigh fading. by applying maximal ratio transmission (mrt) at the source and maximal ratio combining (mrc) at the destination, the equivalent end to end output signalo interference plus noise ratio (sinr) of the system is first obtained, then analytical expressions as well as asymptotic results are derived to evaluate the system performance. the detailed contributions of this paper are outlined as follows:

we present a new analytical expression for the ergodic capacity of the hybrid system, which is applicable to cases involving an arbitrary number of interferers and antennas.

tight analytical expressions for the op and aser are derived, which can efficiently evaluate the system perormance. we consider multiple antenna scenarios with the presence of cci, while only considered single antenna scenarios without the presence of cci. although considered the multiple antenna case, it ignored the cci in the system performance analysis. satellite

fig. 1: system model of hstrn with cci at destination. relay links

to gain further insight, simple asymptotic expressions for op and aser are developed at high snr to show the asymptotic behavior of the dual hop af relay network, in terms of two key parameters: diversity order and array gain. | · |

ii. system model

consider an af hstrn in which a geostationary satellite (s) communicates with a terrestrial destination (d) via a terrestrial relay (r). here, the direct link between s and d is assumed to be unavailable due to heavy shadowing. the communication occurs during two time phases. during the first time phase, the satellite carries out transmit bf with weight × 1) and sends the signal x (t) to r through the vector w1 (ns × 1). meanwhile, the signal received fading channel h1 (ns by r is corrupted by i1 co channel interferers {s1,i (t)}i1 i=1 with an average power of {p1,i}i1 i=1. as such, the received signal at r can be written as

where ps denotes the transmit power at s, x (t) is the transmit = 1 and n1 (t) is zero mean additive signal with e (cid:5) |x (t)|2 (cid:6)

= white gaussian noise (awgn) at r satisfying e σ2 1. in addition, g1,i is the channel coefficient for the i th interference relay link, and is assumed to be drawn from an independently and identically distributed (i.i.d) complex gaussian distribution. (cid:6) 2

during the second time phase, r first amplifies the received

× 1). and then sends it to d through the fading channel h 2 (nd under the condition that the destination is corrupted by i 2 interferers with average powers {p2,j}i2 j=1, and that a receive × 1) is used, the output signal at d bf weight vector w2 (nd is given by (cid:10)(cid:2)

where pr is the transmit power at r, n2 (t) is awgn at d obeying n2 (t) ∼ nc j=1 represents the (cid:6) = 1, and interference signal with each obeying e g2,j is the channel vector for the j th interference destination (cid:14) link satisfying g2,j ∼ nc 0, ind

assuming that perfect csi is available at either s or d, mrt and mrc can be adopted1, in which case w1 = h1/(cid:2)h1(cid:2) f and w2 = h2/(cid:2)h2(cid:2) f . by using (1) and (2) for (3), after some algebraic manipulations, the output sinr at d can be expressed as

f and γ4 = (cid:8) (cid:8)2 δ = f . here, ¯γ1, ¯γ2, ¯γ3,i, and ¯γ4,j denote the average snrs of each link. in order to analyze the performance of the hstrn, we first introduce some known results about the statistical properties of wireless fading channels, and then provide a detailed derivation of the theoretical formulas for the ergodic capacity, op, and aser of the considered system.

satellite terrestrial links are usually modeled by composite fading distributions to describe more accurately the amplitude fluctuation of the signal envelope . although some mathmatical models, such as loo, barts stutzman, and karasawa et al., have been presented to describe the satellite channel, the shadowed rician model proposed in is a popular one, which provides a significantly less computational burden than other channel models. the channel vector h 1 with i.i.d shadowed rician fading distribution is described as h 1 =

the zero forcing (zf) or minimum mean square error (mmse) beamforming schemes can achieve a better performance. however, they require csi for the interfering links, which results in significant implementation complexity. on the contrary, the mrc scheme adopted in this paper only requires csi for the satellite relay link, which is easier to obtain. 3

¯h1 + ˜h1, where the los component ¯h1 is composed of i.i.d nakagami m random variables and the entries of the scattering component ˜h1 follow the i.i.d rayleigh fading distribution . according to , by using the inverse laplace transform of the mgf, a well approximated expression for the probbility density function (pdf) and cumulative distributiuon function (cdf) of γ1 = ¯γ1 (cid:2)h1(cid:2)2 f are, respectively, given by

since r and d are two terrestrial nodes, the relay destination link is often assumed to undergo a rayleigh or nakagami fading distribution distribution , . in our work, we assume the terrestrial link h2 is rayleigh distributed, and hence the pdf and cdf of γ2 = ¯γ2 (cid:2)h2(cid:2)2 f are given by

can be expressed

according to , since each entry of g 2,j is an i.i.d complex gaussian random variable (rv), by defining f j = wh follows the rayleigh

2 g2,j, it can be easily shown that |fj|2 in this section, by using the method of meijer g functions, we derive analytical expressions for the ergodic capacity, op, and aser of the considered hstrn.

the average ergodic capacity is defined as the expected value of the instantaneous mutual information of the end tond sinr, namely

where the coefficient 1/2 accounts for the fact that the entire communication occurs during two time phases. by substituting γd along with (4), (13) can be derived as

for i = 1, 2, ci can be expressed in terms of the pdf of

theorem 1. closed form expressions for c1 and c2 are given p,q [· |· ] represent the by (18) and (19), respectively, where g m,n meijer g functions of a single variable.

due to the fact that a closed form expression for the pdf of γ3 = γ1 + γ2 is mathematically intractable, c3 can not be calculated using methods similar to those for c 1 and c2. using the definition of mgf, mγi (s) (i = 1, 2) can be expressed with respect to the pdf of γi as

then, according to , c 3 in (14) is given by

where ei (−s) is the exponential integral function , m (s) represents the first order derivative of the mgf with respect to γ3 with mγ3 (s). furthermore, (s) = mγ1 using meijer g functions, an analytical expression for (21) can be obtained via theorem 2. (1) γ3

proof. see appendix b.

finally, by substituting (18), (19) and (22) into (14), one can directly calculate the ergodic capacity of the considered hybrid network.

remark 1. note that the meijer g function of a single varible can be efficiently calculated by standard software such as matlab and mathematica, and the meijer g functions of two variables can be computed by using the efficient approaches proposed in . thus our theoretical formula provides an efficient method to evaluate the performance of the hstrn.

b. outage probability

the op is an important quality of service (qos) measure in wireless systems and is defined as the probability that the output instantaneous snr γd falls below an acceptable snr threshold γth, namely,

the cdf fγd (γth) of γd in (4) is mathematically intractable. to overcome this problem, we consider the upper bound of the instantaneous end to end sinr in (4) as

then, the cdf of γup can be obtained as

where the cdfs, fγ1 (x) and fγ2 (x), can be approximated as

in (28) and (29), we have exploited the fact that the system under consideration is assumed to be interference limited, and 4

(29) thus the noise term is omitted in (16) and (17). it will be demonstrated in section iv via computer simulations that although there exists a small deviation at the approximate approach in (26) can provide sufficient accuracy.

finally, by substituting (31) and (33) into (27), after some algebraic manipulations, fγup (x) can be expressed as (34). by replacing x with γth in (34), it is straightforward to calculate the approximated yet accurate op of the given hstrh in the presence of cci.

according to , by using the mgf, the aser for wireless

systems operating over fading channels can be expressed as

then, to solve the other two integrals i2 and i3, we express the exponential function in terms of meijer g functions as [33, eq. (11)]

using i1, i2 and i3 in (36), an analytical expression for m γd can be obtained as

in what follows, we provide an approximate yet accuate aser expression for three commonly used modulation formats, namely, m pam, m psk, and m ary quadrature amplitude modulation (m qam). (42)

for m pam signals, the aser can be calculated as

although the aser of the considered network can be comuted by substituting (42) into (43), it requires numerical integration. to solve this problem, we use the alternative method of [35, eq. (3), eq. (14)] to obtain

for m psk modulation, the aser can be obtained as

which can be approximated as

since a square m qam signal can be considered as two m pam signals, its aser can be evaluated as √

(47) following a derivation similar to (44) and (46), an approximate expression for pm−qam can be calculated as 1√ m (cid:7)

remark 2. while the aser expressions derived above are approximate, our computer simulations in section iv will demonstrate that they provide sufficient accuracy.

in this section, we provide an asymptotic analysis at high snr in terms of diversity order and array gain in order to gain further insights into the considered network.

inspired by and , we use the series representation

where in the case of x → 0, pfq (; ;) has the property

with this result, the asymptotic cdf of γ1 can be expressed as 7

since the asymptotic performance of f ∞

γ1 (x) is determined by the lowest order terms of ¯γ1 at high snr, we let l = c in (51), and further obtain

where o (·) stands for higher order terms. meanwhile, as with f ∞ γ2 (x), by applying the maclaurin series representation of the exponential function to (8), one can obtain

in what follows, we consider the asymptotic behavior of the aser in the high snr regime. to this end, we first denote ¯γ1 = η1¯γ and ¯γ2 = η2¯γ, and substitute (55) into (21). after some mathematical manipulations, one can obtain (56)

then, by employing (56) in (35), the asymptotic aser expression with respect to the diversity order and array gain can be obtained as

where the diversity order and array gain are given by

gd = min (ns, nd) , (58) where ξ (a, b, θ) is determined by the modulation formats, which will be described below.

where 2f1 (a, b; c; z) denotes the gauss hypergeometric funcion . (63)

3) m qam: similar to the procedure used in deriving (63),

ξ (a, b, θ) for m qam modulation is given by

remark 3. it is revealed in (58) that the maximal achievable diversity order of the considered hstrn equals the minimum of the number of the antennas deployed at the source and destination. moreover, it can also be observed from (59) that although cci does not affect the system diversity order, it does degrade the performance of the hstrn by reducing the array gain.

v. numerical results this section presents computer simulations to confirm the validity of our analytical results and investigates the impact of the system parameters on the performance of the considered hstrn. in the simulations, the satellite relay link is subject to shadowed rician fading with channel parameters given in table i, and the relay destination link follows a rayleigh fading distribution. similar to most of the related work in this area, we consider η1 = η2 = 1, namely, ¯γ1 = ¯γ2 = ¯γ, and equal total cci power at the relay and destination, namely, (cid:17) i2 j=1 ¯γ4,j = ¯γtot. in addition, the label (ns, nd) denotes the number of antennas at the source and destination, respectively, and all the simulations are obtained by performng 107 channel realizations.

fig. 2 shows the ergodic capacity of the hstrn for different antenna configurations, where the satellite relay link undergoes average shadowing (as) and i 1 = i2 = 1 with ¯γtot = 1db. it can be seen from fig. 2 that the proposed analytical results are in good agreement with the simulation results, implying that the proposed expressions can accurately evaluate the ergodic capacity of the considered system. as expected, the ergodic capacity improves with an increase in the number of antennas, demonstrating the benefits of employing multiple antennas and beamforming in hstrns. for example, the antenna configuration with (n s, nd) = (4, 4) can achieve a capacity enhancement of approximate 1 bit/s/hz compared with (ns, nd) = (2, 2) at ¯γ = 30db.

fig. 3 shows the impact of different cci powers on the ergodic capacity of the hstrn for the other fading cases, namely, frequent heavy shadowing (fhs) and infrequent light shadowing (ils). here, we assume (ns, nd) = (4, 4), ¯γtot = {−∞, 1, 3}db with ¯γtot = −∞db denote the case of no cci, and i1 = i2 = 2 with ¯γ3,1 = 2¯γ3,2 and ¯γ4,1 = 2¯γ4,2. it can be seen from fig. 3 that for both the fhs and ils scenarios, an increase in the cci power causes noticeable degradation of the system capacity. however, as the cci power increases, the capacity gap between fhs and ils becomes smaller, which indicates that in the presence of strong interference, the ergodic capacity is not sensitive to the shadowing conditions.

fig. 4 illustrates the op of hstrn with different antenna configurations for the threshold γ th = 3db and i1 = i2 = 1 with ¯γtot = 1db. the curves for the analytical op and the asymptotic op are calculated by (34) and (55), respectively. as illustrated, an excellent agreement between the simulation and analytical results can be seen, and the analytical curve is sufficiently tight across the entire snr range of interest, while the asymptotic curves match well with the exact curves at high snr. in addition, increasing the number of antennas at the source and/or destination significantly improves the system op. moreover, it can be clearly seen that the achievable diverity order of the considered system is equal to the minimum number of antennas deployed at the source or destination, min (ns, nd). for example, the diversity order is two for the configurations (ns, nd) = (4, 2) and (ns, nd) = (2, 4), and 6

fig. 3: ergodic capacity versus ¯γ for various cci powers.

fig. 4: outage probability of hstrn for different antenna configrations.

fig. 5 depicts the aser of the hstrn with different anenna configurations for bpsk and 8psk modulation schemes. as seen from the figure, the analytical aser curves are very 9

fig. 5: average symbol error rate of hstrn for different antenna configurations in terms of bpsk and 8psk modulation formats.

close to the simulation results in the high snr regime. the asymptotic aser curves in (57) are also plotted to provide further insights into the diversity order and array gain under different antenna configurations. as in the case of op, it can the be seen that the more antennas that are employed at source and/or destination, the better the system performance that can be achieved. moreover, it can be observed that the configuration with (ns, nd) = (4, 2) exhibits a better aser performance than that with (ns, nd) = (2, 4), which indicates that antennas employed at the source provide a greater influence on system performance than antennas at the destination. this is due to the fact that, by employing the af protocol, the sinr of the s r link is amplified by the relay node. this observation also suggests that if the total available number of antennas is fixed, more antennas should be deployed at the source.

fig. 6 plots the aser curves for different cci powers assuming bpsk modulation, where the simulation parameters are set to be the same as fig. 2. similar to the case of ergodic capacity, aser performance degrades significantly with an increase in cci power. when the cci power increases from −∞ to 3db, significant performance degradation occurs alhough the diversity order of the network remains at four. this is because the cci causes a loss of array gain. furthermore, comparing the aser for the fhs and as scenarios, although the as case yields better performance than the fhs case, the better channel quality does not offer an increase in diversity order. however, it does improve the system performance by providing extra array gain.

in this paper, we have investigated the performance of a multiple antenna hybrid satellite terrestrial relay network with multiple co channel interferes at both the terrestrial relay and destination. specifically, we have derived an approximate closed form expression for the ergodic capacity of the considred network, and we have obtained analytical expressions for op and aser that are very tight except for small deviations in the low snr regime. in addition, we have also provided 10

fig. 6: average symbol error rate of hstrn for different cci powers in terms of bpsk modulation format.

simple asymptotic formulas for the high snr regime, which enable the characterization of various system parameters on the achievable diversity order and array gain of the network. simulations have been provided to confirm the validity of the theoretical analysis, and indicate the impact of key system parameters such as number of antennas, channel coefficients and cci power on system performance. it has been found that although the maximal diversity order of min (n s, nd) can be achieved, the cci severely degrades the performance of the hstrn by reducing the array gain.

appendix a proof of theorem 1

then, substituting (a.6) into (15) and expressing ln (1 + x) in terms of meijer g functions according to [33, eq. (11)] 11

using the integral relationship in [33, eq. (21)], i a,3 and

substituting (a.11) and (a.12) into (a.8), the desired result of c1 is given by (18) after some mathematical manipulations. similarly, by using (7) and (11) in (17) and [26, eq.

then, substituting (a.13) into (15) along with (a.9) yields

finally, by substituting (a.16) into (a.14), expression for c2 in (19) can be obtained. the analytical

thus, the analytical expression of m

finally, from (20) and (b.17), the closed form expression for c3 is given by

to solve the four integrals in (b.18), we first apply the identity [39, eq. (8.4.11.1)] to express the ei (−s) in terms of meijer functions as

a. vanelli coralli, g. corazza, g. karagiannidis, p. mathiopoulos, d. michalopoulos, c. mosquera, s. papaharalabos, and s. scalise, "satellite communications: research trends and open issues," in proc. of the interational workshop on satellite and space communications, iwssc'07., siena tuscany italy, sep. 2007, pp. 71 75. i. s. gradshteyn and i. m. ryzhik, table of integrals, series, and

k. roach, "meijer g function representations," in proc. acm interna

tional conf. symbolic algebraic computation, pp. 205 211, july 1997.

a. p. prudnikov, y. a. brychkov, and o. i. marichev, integrals and series, 1st ed. gordon and breach science publishers, 1990, vol. 3.

kang an received the b.s. degree from nanjing university of aeronautics and astronautics, naning, china, in 2011, and m.s. degrees from the pla university of science and technology, naning, china, in 2014, all in electronic engineering. he is currently working towards the ph.d. degree in electronic engineering, from the pla university of science and technology, nanjing, china. his research interests include cooperative communicaion, satellite communication, cognitive radio and physical layer security. 13