phase delay versus phase rotation cells for circular polarization transmit arrays—application to satellite ka band beam steering

jorge r. costa , senior member, ieee, and carlos a. fernandes

abstract— planar transmit arrays (tas) have been an attracive solution as gain enhancers for various applications, e.g., satellite communications. the ta performance directly depends on its composing unit cell characteristics. planar unit cells can be categorized into two main types: phase rotation (pr) and phaseelay (pd) cells. there is no hint in the literature about the relative merits of these two types of cells for circular polarization when assessing the final ta performance. this paper offers a systematic comparison between the cells' working principles and analyzes their impacts on ta performance. examples of a pr based ta and a pd based ta are designed for singleand wide angle beam steering operating at the satellite ka band. they are evaluated by simulation and measurement to quantify performance differences. no previous work employed a pr ta for wide angle beam steering. this paper shows that pr ta offers a filtering effect toward the cross polarization component of the source. this leads to better axial ratio and combined 3 db axial ratio and 3 db gain bandwidth. however, pd cells are easier to design and insensitive to feed polarization. the analysis in this paper allows a more informed decision when selecting the unit cell category for any given ta application.

index terms— circular polarization (cp), flat lens, frequencyelective surface (fss), mechanical scanning, satellite on the move (sotm), transmit arrays (tas), wireless communication network.

t ransmit arrays (tas) have been an attractive solution

to achieve high gain pencil beam in many applications such as point to point links and satellite communications due low cost, to their potential high efficiency, simple feed network, and no feed blockage effect . the working principle of a ta is similar to the one of a dielectric lens in which each zone of the lens or ta

manuscript received august 17, 2017; revised november 19, 2017; accepted december 19, 2017. date of publication december 27, 2017; date of current version march 1, 2018. this work was supported by the fundação para a ciência e a tecnologia under grant uid/eea/50008/2013. (corresponding author: parinaz naseri.)

p. naseri and c. a. fernandes are with the instituto de telecomunicações, 1049 001 lisbon, portugal, and also with instituto superior técnico, univeridade de lisboa, 1049 001 lisbon, portugal (e mail: parinaz.naseri@lx.it.pt). s. a. matos and j. r. costa are with the instituto de telecomunicações, 1049 001 lisbon, portugal, with instituto superior técnico, universidade de lisboa, 1049 001 lisbon, portugal, and also with the departamento de ciências e tecnologias da informação av. das forças armadas, instituto universitário de lisbon (iscte iul), 1649 026 lisbon, portugal.

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available , senior member, ieee

adds an appropriate phase shift to the field passing through it. while in a lens, this is met by adjusting the lens profile, in a ta, this is achieved by adjusting each phase shift provided by individual unit cells with constant thickness populating the ta. therefore, comparing to a lens with the same gain, a ta has much less mass and offers more flexibility to use the available horizontal space for beam scanning.

the unit cells should have minimum reflection and minium insertion loss, while ensuring a phase shift range up to 360° in order to correct the phase of the incident wave at each point of the ta surface. the amount of phase shift required for a cell is dependent on the desired phase of the outgoing wave at cell position of the ta minus the phase shift that the incident wave endures from the feed until it reaches that cell position.

there are several different types of ta unit cells. for example, they can be implemented by connecting the two parallel sides of the ta through variable length of transmission lines , by coupling the ta surfaces through various shapes of inclusions , by stacking subwavelength capacitive patches and inductive grids , or by using artificial engieered materials , . among the aforementioned types the elements composed of planar patches and/or of cells, slots have low losses and low thickness, and they are easy to fabricate using printed circuit board technology. therefore, this kind of cells has been extensively employed in both fully passive and reconfigurable structures.

the ground terminal might be on the move. thus, in order to maintain the link between the two communication ends, beam steering capabilty is required at the ground terminal antenna. beam steering in tas can be obtained by electrically tuning the phase shift , of reconfigurable cells or mechanically moving the primary feed or the ta or a hybrid solution . the first approach offers fast beam steering, with no wearable parts. however, reconfigurable tas suffer from low phase reslution, high losses, and low reliability of some of the available options at high frequencies as for the satellite communications ka band (20 30 ghz) . consequently, printed passive patch based tas with mechanical beam steering capability are currently more promising for satcom at ka band. in some satellite communications,

circular polarization (cp) has been a key consideration in the design of tas for any communication link in which the misalignment of the transmit and receive antennas or faraday's effect might introduce loss or error . a cp high gain beam can be obtained by illuminating a ta of double linearly polarized (lp) unit cells by a cp feed or by feeding a ta of sequentially rotated cp unit cells with an lp feed or a cp source , .

this paper focuses on tas with passive patch cells for cp beam steering applications, fed by a cp source. there are generally two approaches to generate different phase shifts from a designed passive unit cell. these approaches include varying the center frequency of the designed unit cell , , and rotating the designed unit cell , , . the first approach leads to designing a discrete number of cells with slightly different geometries, all with good transmission coefficients within a certain frequency band, but providing different phase shifts at that band. we call this type the "phase delay (pd)" cells throughout this paper. the second approach is where only one unit cell is designed and then rotated with different angles to provide a continuous phase shift up to 360°. we name these the "phase rotation (pr)" cells.

we believe that the detailed knowledge about the unit cells' impact on the ta performance can contribute to achieving the best performance with the available resources. therefore, in this paper, we compare the two categories of passive patch elements and thoroughly explain their physical and electrical differences, and their effects on the ta system performance. while the literature on the topic lacks such information, this paper presents a detailed comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of the two unit cell categories. to better illustrate these points, an example of pd and pr cells is presented and used to generate two corresponding tas. these are designed to achieve high gain cp pencil beam with widengle beam steering capability for satellite communications at ka band.

this paper is organized as follows. in section ii, the workng principles of the pd and pr cells for cp are explained. section iii presents an example of each pd and pr cell and provides thorough analysis of the performance of each cell. in section iv, the full wave simulation results of two gain enhancing tas composed of the introduced pd and pr cells are presented. the compared performance of each ta and its verification by measurement results is presented in section v.

ii. operating principle of phase delay and phase rotation cells

(s parameters) can be defined in right (r ) and left (l) cps. these parameters are dependent on the orthogonal xnd y lp s parameters . here, we define two coordinate systems, one for the ta and another for each individual cell (see fig. 1). while the first has fixed axes (x, y, and z), the in plane axes of the later (x (cid:2), y(cid:2), and z) change based on the cell rotation. these coordinate systems are depicted in fig. 1. the cp s parameters of any kind of rotated unit cell that is symmetric in relation to the z axis are summarized below using the same fig. 1. coordinate system of the ta (x, y, and z) and coordinate system (cid:2), and z). (a) unit cell. (b) ta. of the unit cell (x (cid:2), y

nomenclature as in (cid:2)ll (cid:2)lr (cid:2)rl (cid:2)rr tlr tll trr trl ⎡ ⎤ ⎡

and ψ is the rotation angle between the ta (x, y, and z) coordinate system and the unit cell (x (cid:2), y(cid:2), and z) coordinate system (see fig. 1).

pd and pr unit cells have distinct operation functions based on different working principles beside their geometric differences. in a set of pd cells, the range of 0° − 360° phase shift is obtained by adjusting the dimensions of the composing metallic elements comparing to a reference cell. therefore, in a collection of pd cells that includen distinct unit cells, n discrete phase shifts are accessible. in fact, each discrete phase shift is associated with a specific pd cell that has its specific transmission and reflection coefficients. it can become challenging to design a pd cell with specific phase shift with high transmission. this double requirement for each pd cell in the set can become increasingly complex when high resolution and a large number of different pd cells are required. as a result, a set of pd cells include cells that some of which offer lower transmission coefficients but distinct phase shift.

equations (2) (9) can be specifically written for a set of pd cells. in this paper, we will refer only to pd cells for cp operation. in this case, a pd cell must present the same performance for x (cid:2) and y(cid:2) lps. therefore, the cell must be (1)

(9) double symmetric regarding x (cid:2) and y(cid:2) axes, and its shape shall not change if rotated by 90°. moreover, since none of the n pd cells are rotated, the coordinate system of each cell matches the coordinate system of the ta (i.e., ψ = 0; x = x (cid:2); and y = y(cid:2)). therefore, for the n order pd cell (1 ≤ n ≤ n)

where (cid:4)ϕ n is the relative phase shift provided by the n order unit cell in the pd collection. this relative phase shift is the same for the transmission and reflection coefficients because it is assumed that the cell is symmetric in relation to the z axis. thus, by replacing in (2) (9) (cid:8)

coefficients t n rr_pd are assumed to be close to zero and not exactly zero because when the cell is integrated in a ta, its neighboring cells are no longer identical. thus, the conventional periodic boundary assumption used for the unit cell design to obtain the cell s matrix is no longer valid. on the contrary, the phase shift in pr cells is achieved by rotating the cell around its perpendicular axes. in fact, for each value of the phase shift, the geometry of the pr cell is unchanged, only rotated by a certain ψ° angle. therefore, pr cells lead to a continuous range of phase shifts between 0° and 360° with almost constant amplitude of the transmission and reflection coefficients.

pr cells must behave distinctively for the two orthogonal linear components of an incident wave, such that they transit both components with equal magnitude and 180° phase difference . this requirement dictates that an ideal pr cell be double symmetric in relation to x (cid:2) and y(cid:2) axes, but its orientation changes in relation to the previous axes once it is rotated by 90°. any discrepancy from this case leads to degradation of cp transmission coefficient and increase in the cp cross component level once the cell is rotated. for example, the proposed pr cell in experiences a great amount of increase in cross polarization amplitude once it is rotated by 90° or 180°. furthermore, due to these requirements for transmission coefficients, the resultant geometry provides also linear reflection coefficients with almost equal amplitude and 180° phase difference. therefore, for the pr cell fig. 2. illustration of how (a) pd and (b) pr tas work. the length of the arrows represents the approximate comparison between the intensity of all the cp beams within the same cell type. all the red lines represent lhcp radiation and all the blue lines represent rhcp radiation.

the phase shift provided by the pr unit cell is presented with 2ψ° when the cell is rotated by ψ°. again, the close to zero value instead of null coefficients is justified by the slightly different responses that the cell presents when integrated in an actual ta with neighboring cells with different rotation values.

b. pd versus pr beam collimating transmit arrays

based on the general properties of pr and pd cells idenified in section ii a, is possible to anticipate distinct general behaviors of tas formed by the two types of cells, irrespective of their practical realization. in the family of lr_pd and (cid:2)n pd cells, coefficients t n rr_pd, in (16) and (18), respectively, are very close to zero. as a result, the main transmitted cp wave from a pd ta has the same polarization as the incident wave, while the main reflected cp wave has the opposite sense. moreover, not only does a pd cell provide phase shift in the main transmitted co polarized wave, it also applies phase shift to the cross polarized transmitted wave and the reflected waves. hence, when a pd ta is designed to collimate the feed radiation toward a specific direction α0°, the cross polarized transmitted wave also gets focused in the same direction, while the reflected back lobe is collimated in the direction of (180 − α0)° [see fig. 2(a)]. it

the aforementioned crossolarization can have three origins: s parameters of each unit cell, the distribution of the cells in a ta, and/or the impurity of the cp from the feed antenna. in a pd ta, this crossolarization does not stem from the s parameters of the pd cells since t n rl_pd are almost zero for all of the pd cells even for up to 30° oblique incidence. however, if the distribution of these cells in a pd ta is asymmetric, a crossolarization component is generated. furthermore, the crossolarization can be more importantly caused by the impurity it is worth mentioning that

(27) of the cp radiation from the feed antenna. the sense of the cp incidence is indifferent to the pd cells and they provide the same phase shift to an rhcp incidence or lhcp one. in other words, t n ll_pd for a pd unit cell. therefore, the cross polarization from the feed also gets focused in the same direction of the main co polarized beam.

lr_pr in (22) and (25) are close to zero. this is achieved due to the symmetric linear transmision coefficients (ty(cid:2) y(cid:2)_pr = −tx (cid:2)x (cid:2)_pr) and symmetric linear reflection coefficients ((cid:2)y(cid:2) y(cid:2)_pr = −(cid:2)x (cid:2)x (cid:2)_pr). however, it is ψ difficult to minimize t rr_pr transmission for a wide frequency band. basically, to design a wideband pr cell, the phase of the x (cid:2) and y(cid:2) polarization transmission coefficients must present the same slope versus frequency and 180° difference between them, while the amplitude must remain constant over that band. since this requirement is hard to be translated to the physical geometry of a cell, the pr cells tend to have a narrower bandwidth compared to the pd cells.

to explain the working principle, consider as an example that the incident wave in the ta is rhcp. all statements are conversely true for an lhcp incident wave. for rhcp incidence, the ta transmits the major part as a collimated lhcp wave, while applying a phase shift to it. nonetheless, in a real designed pr ta, a small part of the rhcp incident wave goes through the pr cell as rhcp wave with no phase shift. consequently, the cross polarization generated by the cell never gets collimated or redirected to any specific direction.

moreover, a pr ta behaves differently with respect to the impurity of the cp radiation from the feed antenna compared to the pd ta. unlike a pd unit cell, according to (23) and (24), a rotated pr cell applies different phase shifts to rhcp or lhcp incident waves. for example, let us consider a pr cell that is rotated clockwise by ψ°. if this cell gets illuminated by an rhcp wave, the major transmission to the other sides of the cell is an lhcp wave with 2ψ° phase shift comparing to the incidence. however, if the same cell gets illuminated by an lhcp wave, the transmitted wave is an rhcp wave with −2ψ° phase shift. therefore, first, the polarization of the feed antenna is important in the design of the pr ta (a ta designed for rhcp incidence will not work for an lhcp source). second, a pr ta does not focus, but else diverges the cross polarization component of the feed.

furthermore, (26) and (27) show that the back lobe radiation at (180 − α0)° from a pr ta only stems from the reflected wave with the same cp sense as the feed. while, from (25), a noncollimated reflection with the orthogonal polarization of the feed is reflected back to 180°. fig. 2 summarizes and compares the aforementioned behavior.

iii. phase delay and phase rotation unit cells

the analysis from section ii is general for any pr or pd cell configuration. this section compares the performance of a practical example of a pd cell versus a pr cell. the interest is centered on the transmission characteristics across the band for normal and oblique incidence. both unit cells are simulated using the commercial software ansys hfss using fig. 3. pd unit cell (square patches with side lengths of l1, l2, and l3) .

transmission phase ((cid:4)φn ) of the pd unit cells at 30 ghz under

fig. 4. normal and oblique incidences.

the frequency domain solver with local periodic boundary condition and floquet mode excitation.

a. phase delay (pd) cell example

the pd cells in this paper are the same used in , designed for the uplink frequency of satellite communications is composed of five in the ka band (30 ghz). the cell subwavelength square capacitive patches with side lengths of l1, l2, and l3. each cell includes a pair of l1 patches, a pair of l2 patches, and a single l3 patch, as shown in fig. 3. the metallic patches are stacked with four 0.787 mm thick duroid 5880 dielectric layers with εr = 2.2 and tanδ = 0.0009. the in plane size of the cell is wpd = 2.5mm(λ0/4 at 30 ghz) and the total thickness of the cell is tpd = 3.35 mm.

by varying the dimensions of the patches in a unit cell, it is possible to vary the phase shift of the transmission coefficient from 0° to 316° (see fig. 4). this range is chosen as an acceptble tradeoff between the ta performance and the number of metallic layers. the 63 pd cells were designed to cover the above phase shift range with 5.4° steps on average. based on the study performed in , the transmission coefficient of all cells is better than −0.55 db within the ka uplink band (i.e., 29.5 30 ghz). also, the reflection coefficients of all pd cells are lower than −9.5 db within the bandwidth under normal incidence. the performance of this pd cell type has been verified experimentally in . fig. 5. pr unit cell. (a) 3 d view. (b) first layer. (c) second layer.

unit cell can increase significantly toward the edges of the ta. fig. 4 also presents the variation of the phase shift of the pd cell family for oblique incidence angles up to 45°. it is shown that the phase shift range provided by the 63 pd cells decreases from [0°, 316°] to [−12.7°, 250.7°] as the incidence angle increases to 45°. this may lead to phase errors in the aperture of large tas with the consequent reduction of the measured gain compared to the expected value. the ampliudes of transmission and reflection coefficients of the pd cells also degrade with the increase of the angle of incidence. for some of the 63 cells, the transmission coefficient can reduce to −2.1 db, and the reflection coefficient can increase up to −4.5 db for 45° incident angle.

collimating tas necessarily require different side by side cells with different phase shifts. the largest difference usually occurs at the 360° jump rings. therefore, the conventional periodic boundaries assumption used to obtain the unit cell's s matrix through simulation is not completely valid in tas. the effect was analyzed for these pd cells in .

an anisotropic cell similar to that in and was designed as an example of a pr cell. it is composed of three metal layers separated by 0.508 mm thick duroid 5880 dielecric slabs. the design of the cell is based on antenna filterntenna structure described in . the in plane width of the unit cell is wpr = 5mm(λ0/2 at 30 ghz), and the total thickness is tpr = 1.05 mm. fig. 5 shows the structure of this cell; its dimensions are summarized in table i. the role of each element is thoroughly explained in . cell rotation by ψ° about the z axis introduces a 2ψ° phase shift in the transmission coefficient. so the 0° 360° variation of the phase shift is simply achieved by 0° 180° rotation of the unit cell. therefore, the phase shift provided by a pr cell can be continuous and not discretized as it is in the pd cells. fig. 6. cp s parameters of the pr cell for normal incidence along with the measured transmission coefficients.

unit cell (all with ψ = 0° rotation), illuminated by an rhcp incident wave. the transmission coefficients of the pr cell, trr_pr and trl_pr, were measured by placing a planar surface of identical nonrotated pr cells in the middle of a direct link between two horns. the results have confirmed the expected behavior of the pr cells, as seen in fig. 6. identical curves are obtained for lhcp incident wave. as mentioned before, the unit cell is designed such that the opposite sense of incident wave cp gets transmitted, while the phase is controllable through the cell rotation. according to fig. 6, this transmission is better than −0.85 db within the ka uplink band (marked as a gray bar in fig. 6). the transmitted cross polarization level is about −10 db. however, this level is expected to decrease if the unit cells are used in a focusing ta, since the crossolarized wave does not get collimated through the ta. this is because the phase of the transmission coefficient in (22) does not change with ψ° rotation. in terms of the reflection coefficient, its value is below −12 db within the band, a better value than some pd cells . nevertheless, it is noticeable that the transmission coefficient value of the pr cell, in fig. 6, drops to lower values out of the operating bandwidth when compared to the pd cells (e.g., for 29 ghz t n > −0.8 db for all cells, while trl = −1.25 db).

the reflection and transmission frequency response of the cell for different incident angles is presented in fig. 7. we can see that in all coefficients the variations are minor for incident angles up to 45°. for example, the transmission loss increases to 1 db for 45° oblique incidences [see fig. 7(c)]. this somewhat resilience to oblique incident angles is mainly due to the use of a thinner cell comparing to the pd ones.

in a pr ta, while all of the cells have the same geometry, they are rotated with different ψ° angles. that is why, it is important to verify the stability of the pr cell's response for different rotation angles. the key factor is the variation in the coupling between adjacent cells once the cells are rotated. generally, rotated slot rings experience less change in the coupling with the similar neighbor cell, compared to rectangular shapes that are much more influenced by this effect. for example, for the presented pr cell, the slot rings, in the first and the third layers, present similar couplings (a) reflection coefficient (cid:2)lr_pr. (b) reflection coefficient (cid:2)rr_pr. fig. 7. (c) transmission coefficients tlr_pr and trr_pr of the pr cell for different incident angles.

independent of the relative rotation between adjacent cells. nonetheless, once the pr cell is rotated, the coupling between the rectangular adjacent elements changes and consequently the response of the unit cell also alters. due to the cell geometry, it is verified that the cell response is identical for a rotation of ψ = 0°, 90°, and 180°. fig. 8 shows the dependence of the cell's s parameters on the rotation angle from ψ = 0° to 45°. compared to the initial state, the transission coefficient decreases 0.1 db and the transmitted crossolarization increases by 1 db, while the reflections decrease. in the proposed structure, the size of the s gap in the rings and of the first and the third rectangular elements have the most impact on the amount of coupling. the bigger the rectangle lengths and the smaller the s gap, the more variation in the amplitude of the coefficients occurs with the cell ψ° rotation. finally, based on simulations of both presented examles of the pd unit cells and pr cell, we evaluated the fig. 8. different rotation ψ angles under normal incidence. (a) reflection and (b) transmission coefficients of the pr cell for

sensitivity of their design to fabrication inaccuracies in terms of overetching and misalignment between the layers. the analysis confirms that with misalignment up to 500 μm and maximum overetching of 50 μm, which are the achievable accuracies in our university lab, both pd and pr cells maintain transmission coefficients better than −1.6 db with a maximum phase variation of 25°.

iv. examples of phase delay and phase rotation transmit arrays

in this section, we compare two tas based on the introuced pd and pr cells. these full wave simulated tas are 140 mm × 190 mm and similar to the one fabricated in . one of the tas is composed of 76×56 pd cells [see fig. 9(a)], while the other is composed of only 38 × 28 pr cells [see fig. 9(b)] due to the double size of the designed pr cells when compared to the pd cells. throughout this paper, we designate the field phase term as ϕ according to the notation e− j ϕ.

the phase correction function of the tas is calculated based

where focal distance f is 100 mm and the collimated beam direction is α0 = 32.5° (with respect to the aperture normal) when the feed is at the focal position. the configurations of the two tas are shown in fig. 9(a) and (b), respectively, where they are fed by an x polarized horn. the tas are (28) fig. 9. configuration of the (a) pd tas and (b) pr tas used for full wave simulations in ansys hfss .

fed in the simulations by standard gain ka band rectangular horn (flann microwave n° 122240 15) with 14.1 dbi gain at 30 ghz, successively with two orthogonal lps. for each ta, the lp results from xnd y polarized horn are combined based on (29) where e b a presents the patterns of the e field in the b direction (θ or ϕ) when electric field on the aperture of the horn is a− polarized (x or y) to obtain the cp patterns of each ta to an ideal rhcp wave (( (cid:5)ex − j (cid:5)e y)/ ˆθ + e 2) illumination. in this way, it is possible to isolate the ta polarization behavior from the potential polarization impurity of an alternative cp feed e θ x

it is worth mentioning that due to different rotation angles of the pr cells, their detailed structure, and circular geometry, a solver based on tetrahedral meshing provides much more accurate results than hexahedral meshing based solver, when compared for similar computational resources and time. both tas are simulated in ansys hfss using the frequency solver. in order to save memory and computational time, the hybrid finite element boundary integral method available by hfss is employed to avoid unnecessary meshing of the free space volume. fig. 10. simulated performance of pd ta.

a. pd transmit array simulations

the simulation results of the pd ta shown in fig. 9(a) are presented in fig. 10 for the feed central position. we can see that the ta successfully focusses the rhcp radiation of the feed antenna to an rhcp pencil beam pointing at 32.5° direction. the directivity of this antenna is 29.6 dbi at 30 ghz. moreover, as explained before, it is noticeable that the cross polarization is also focused to α0 = 32.5° due to the phase correction applied by the pd ta on the cross polarized transmission coefficient [i.e., t n lr_pd from (16)]. this effect leads to the main beam cross polarization level of 17.6 db and degrades the axial ratio of the main beam to 2.3 db. the pd ta, as explained before, collimates both rhcp and lhcp reflected waves to 180° − α0 ≈ 148° due to the phase correction implied in (cid:2)n rr_pd from (18). however, these reflections are, respectively, 24.2 and 19.9 db lower than the gain of the main lobe. lr_pd from (17) and (cid:2)n fig. 12. prototypes of the pd ta and pr ta. it can be seen that the size of pd cells are half of the size of the pr cells. also, the pr ta is much thinner than the pd ta.

from an rhcp feed source to an lhcp radiation pointing to α0 = 32.5° with the gain of 29.6 dbi at 30 ghz, similar to the gain of the pd ta. the ta applies no phase shift on the ψ transmitted rhcp waves [i.e., t rr_pr from (22)]. therefore, unlike the pd ta, the cross polarization is not refracted by the ta and follows the feed radiation direction instead of the main beam direction. this is seen in fig. 11 around θ = 0°. the pr ta presents a much better main beam axial ratio of 1.02 db calculated from main beam cross polarization level, that is, 24.6 db. it can also be seen that only the crossolarization component (i.e., rhcp radiation) is collimated to 148° (∼= 180° − α0) due to the phase correction introduced by the pr ta on the co polarized reflection coefficient [i.e., (cid:2)ψ rr_pr from (25)]. this rhcp back lobe level is 17 db lower than the gain of the main lobe.

in order to verify the aforementioned comparisons between the two types of cells, the two tas presented in fig. 9 were fabricated. for the array was fabrication, each layer of printed on 20 mil rogers 5880 with 35 μm cladding. then, the printed layers were aligned and glued together with rogers 3001 bonding film, which has the same relative permittivity as the rogers 5880 substrate. the prototypes are displayed in fig. 12, where the size of the unit cells and the thickness of the two tas are compared using the same scale. it is shown that the pr unit cells are twice of the size of the pd cells while they only have 1/3 of the pd cells' thickness. the pd ta weighs about 214 g while the pr ta weight is less than 1/3 of this amount and is only 66 g.

to test both tas, the standard horn has been replaced by an actual cp feed. the motivation is to compare the pr ta performance in the same conditions reported for a pd ta in . therefore, we use the same type of compact feed system that has been used in . it is a combination of a corner truncated patch with an intermediate lens to enhance the gain and control the phase center distance. this feed is designed to produce a 12 dbi gain rhcp radiation pattern at 30 ghz. the obtained axial ratio is 2 db , and the 3 db axial ratio bandwidth is 0.4 ghz. fig. 13. 3 d printed setup to hold the ta, the intermediated lens, and the patch antenna. the photograph shows the pd ta that can be unscrewed and replaced by the pr ta. the intermediate lens and the patch can be jointly shifted parallel to the ta, along the a axis, to steer the main beam in elevation.

a 3 d printed support was designed to hold the patch antenna, the intermediate lens, and each ta firmly at the precise designed distances from each other (see fig. 13). the tas have the same fixed holes' positions so that they can be easily swapped without changing those distances. the setup allows moving the feed continuously along the x axis from a = −27 mm to a = +30 mm, with constant f. this leads to a beam scanning interval from 50° and 17°, respectively, according to the calculations presented in .

figs. 14 and 15 present the measured lhcp and rhcp radiation patterns of the pd ta and pr ta at 30 ghz for various beam tilts between 17° and 50°. the results confirm that the pd ta preserves the feed polarization, while collimating both the cond cross polarization components. the scan loss is ≤2.8 db up to 50° tilt angle. the pr ta converts the feed rhcp to lhcp and presents lower values of the main beam cross polarization. the scan loss is ≤3 db for the same range of beam tilts.

fig. 16 presents the gain versus frequency for each ta when the feed is in the central focal point position of the tas, corresponding to the main beam direction at α0 = 32.5°. based on these results, the 3 db gain bandwidth of the pd ta antenna is 2.5 ghz (29 31.5 ghz) with 29.1 gain dbi at 30 ghz; while the 3 db gain bandwidth of the pr ta solution is 1.9 ghz (29 30.9 ghz) with 29.5 dbi gain at 30 ghz. the cross polarization curves of both tas are presented in fig. 16. the cross polarization level of the pd ta clearly increases away from the central frequency and this is due to the increasing cross polarization component of the feed. in fact, the patch feed has a narrow cp bandwidth. since the pd ta collimates both the cond cross polarizations, it inherits the feed poor polarization bandwidth. that is, the reduction in co polarization gain in the pd ta is accompanied by an increase in cross polarization gain. in contrast, the pr ta filers out the transmitted cross polarization and collimates only the co polarization component of the feed radiation pattern making it much lower across the bandwidth. in conclusion, fig. 14. measured radiation patterns of pd ta for beam tilt angles between 17° and 50° at 30 ghz, rhcp (blue solid curves) and lhcp (red dashed curves) .

even if the operation bandwidth of the pr cells is narrower than the pd cells (see fig. 6 and , respectively), in the end, both tas have similar gain bandwidth due to the polarization performance of the feed. to highlight better

the feed cross polarization filtering effect, fig. 17 shows the measured axial ratio of both antennas for the main beam direction (α0 = 32.5°), compared to the simulated axial ratio of the isolated feed antenna. it shows that the 3 db axial ratio bandwidth of the pd ta is 0.57 ghz (29.98 30.55 ghz), which is very similar to the feed bandidth of 0.4 ghz. in contrast, the main beam axial ratio of the pr ta antenna is less than 2.3 db throughout the whole band of 28 32 ghz, and its value at 30 ghz is only 0.9 db. however, as explained in section ii, the pr ta always directs the cross polarization component of the feed to θ = 0° and not to the main beam direction at θ = α0 = 32.5°. so, it is also important to analyze the cross polarization level fig. 16. realized rhcp gain of the pd ta (black solid line) and realized lhcp gain of the pr ta (blue solid line) versus frequency for the feed at the central focal position, that is, when the main beam direction is α0 = 32.5°.

fig. 17. simulated axial ratio of the feed antenna versus frequency, compared to the axial ratio of the pr ta and pd ta measured for the main beam direction α0 = 32.5°, with the feed at the central focal position.

at θ = 0°. it is less than 6.3 dbi within the 28 32 ghz interval, which is more than 22 db below the main lobe.

finally, it remains to analyze the measured back lobes. only the extreme positions of the feed provide unperturbed backobe measurement, free from the antenna support blocking. we analyze the a = −27 mm case, for which the main beam tilts to θ = 50° and the back lobe to θ = 130°. fig. 18 superimposes the corresponding cp radiation patterns for the pd ta and pr ta. the behavior of the front lobe regarding cond cross polarizations is similar to what was already discussed for the main beam so we focus only on the back lobe. the pd ta collimates both the rhcp and lhcp polarizations toward θ = 130° at 27.2 and 17.4 db levels below the main lobe, respectively. in contrast, the pr ta only collimates the rhcp polarization in the back lobe toward θ = 130° at 18.9 db level below the main lobe. therefore, the pd lens has a higher level of total back lobe at θ = 130° fig. 18. measured radiation patterns for pd ta and pr ta with the feed at a = −27 mm.

versus the main lobe, that is, −17.6 db, compared to the pr lens that has −18.8 db.

the above results are summarized in table ii. they do not show drastic differences between the electrical perforances of the tested pd ta and pr ta, safe for the axial ratio, which is significantly better for the latter. on physical the thickness and weight are clearly in favor of aspects, the pr ta. however, other intrinsic differences between the two approaches require careful consideration by the designer before choosing one.

pr tas only work optimally for the cp polarization sense for which they are designed. for instance, when designed for an rhcp feed, the pr ta output beam in transmit mode will be lhcp while the ta will not work with an lhcp feed. in the receive mode, the incoming wave in the above example must be lhcp for the pr ta to convert and focus it on the feed as an rhcp wave. an incoming rhcp wave will not be focused on the feed. in the general case, an elliptical polarized wave from the feed will be filtered by the pr ta to transmit only the pure correct sense of cp, which alleviates the requirements for the feed axial ratio. this comes at the cost of losses for the cross cp component, of course. for an lp feed, these losses would amount to 3 db. so, the axial ratio bandwidth of the pr ta output beam is not limited by the feed, but only by the cells.

this filtering effect makes pr tas unsuitable for appliations where polarization diversity and switching between rhcp and lhcp is required, e.g., when moving between adjaent cells in a multicell ka band satellite services. in addition, it is anticipated that the possibility of designing dual band pr tas with dual polarization diversity as required for satellite applications is slim.

in contrast, cp pd tas preserve the feed's polarization sense, not suffering from the mentioned restrictions. the transmission coefficient bandwidth of pd cells is generally wider than for pr cells, but on the other hand, the best possible axial ratio of the pd ta is always bounded by the feed axial ratio (see table ii) and can be improved by using a feed with wider axial ratio bandwidth. the feed optimization is out of this paper context. hence, when analyzing the output beam in terms of the combined bandwidths of gain and axial ratio, as required for satellite communications, the comparison between pd ta and pr ta may end up biased by the feed in the pd ta. in the example of table ii, the pr ta has triple bandwidth of the pd ta when considering the combined parameters.

at the design stage, pr cells may be more complex than pd to optimize for bandwidth, given the requirement to provide 180° phase difference between the two lp responses.

this paper provides a systematic comparison of pd and pr cells that are widely used as ta building blocks, and studies its impact on the performance of cp tas. pr cells provide the phase shift through the amount of rotation of its composing elements, which are invariant with rotation. pd cells, instead, provide the phase shift by changing the geometry of its composing elements, thus changing the cell effective permittivity. the choice between these two types of cells for tas has remained just a matter of opportunity in the literature, the implications on the ta performance never been compared. this paper offers the designer the key information needed to select the preferred option, given the project specifications.

independent of their physical realizations, were derived from basic physical principles. the knowledge of these properties enables anticiating key aspects of the ta performance and decides which type of cells best fit the project requirements. these findings were confirmed using an application example with demanding electrical specifications (high gain, wide angle beam steering ta at the ka band). general properties of pd and pr cells, filtering characteristic that allows for very good axial ratio output beam. the important consequence of that is that it allows relaxing the feed axial ratio, and it is even possible to use an lp feed, although with the price of 3 db loss in this case. on the other side, it is this interesting filtering characteristic of pr tas that forbids the switching of the cp sense as required, e.g., for satellite communications. in these applications, pd tas instead can offer polarization diversity including lp and both senses of cp with similar performance, but limited by the axial ratio bandwidth and magnitude of the feeding antenna.

all the findings were verified and quantified through fullave simulations and through measurements in the 30 ghz band. far from being just a ta example, the pr ta developed for this paper is novel and has its own merits compared to the literature in terms of beam scanning range, gain, scan loss, bandwidth, and cross polarization.

the authors would like to thank the collaboration from c. brito, j. frinha, and j. filicio for prototype construction and a. almeida for prototype construction and measurements. the authors would also like to thank rogers corporation, gent, belgium, for donating the substrates used for the prototypes.

lens antenna concept using aperture coupled microstrip patches," electron. lett., vol. 32, no. 23, pp. 2109 2111, nov. 1996.

a. k. iyer and g. v. eleftheriades, "a multilayer negative refractiveree space lens at 10, ansys. high

simulation, release 18.0. accessed: feb. 2017. [online]. available: http://www. ansys.com frequency electromagnetic field

e. b. lima, s. matos, j. r. costa, and c. a. fernandes, "evaluation of the phase discretization effect in transmitarrays formed by subavelength patches," in proc. eur. conf. antennas propag. (eucap), lisbon, portugal, apr. 2015, pp. 1 3.

p. naseri, r. mirzavand, and p. mousavi, "dual band circularly polarized transmit array unit cell at x and k bands," in proc. 10th eur. conf. antennas propag. (eucap), davos, switzerland, apr. 2016, pp. 1 4.

parinaz naseri (s'14) received the b.sc. degree in electrical engineering (telecommunications) from in 2013, the university of tehran, tehran, iran, and the m.sc. degree in electrical engineering from the university of alberta, edmonton, ab, canada, in 2017.

in 2016, she joined the instituto de telecomuicações, lisbon, portugal, as a grant researcher. her current research interests include frequencyelective surfaces, transmit arrays, reflect arrays, and mm wave antenna designs.

sérgio a. matos (s'05 m'16) received the bachlor's, m.sc., and ph.d. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from instituto superior técnico, university of lisbon, lisbon, portugal, in 2004, 2005, and 2010, respectively.

he is currently a researcher with the instituto de telecomunicações, lisbon. he is also an assisant professor with the departamento de ciências e tecnologias da informação, instituto universitário de lisboa, lisbon. he has co authored 60 technial papers in international journals and conference proceedings. his current research interests include electromagnetic wave propagation in metamaterials, flat lens design, and transmit arrays.