physical layer security for multiuser satellite communication systems with threshold based scheduling scheme

kefeng guo, member, ieee, kang an, member, ieee, bangning zhang, yuzhen huang, member, ieee, xiaogang tang, member, ieee, gan zheng, senior member, ieee, and theodoros a. tsiftsis, senior member,

abstract—satellite communication (satcom) has attracted much attention due to its inherent characteristics. security issues have gained severe concerns in satcom since it is susceptible to be illegally eavesdropped by malicious ground stations within large scale wireless coverage. in this paper, we investigate the layer security of a multiuser satcom system in the physical presence of multiple eavesdroppers. particularly, we propose a threshold based scheduling scheme, where the geographically clustered eavesdroppers with both the colluded and collaborated eavesdropping scenarios are assumed. specifically, closed form expression for the secrecy outage probability (sop) is derived for the passive eavesdropping scenario when the channel state information (csi) of the eavesdroppers is unavailable. moreover, we obtain a closed form expression for the average secrecy capacity (asc) of the considered system under the proposed user scheduling scheme. in order to get further insights of the proposed scheduling scheme at high signal to noise ratios (snrs), the asymptotic analysis for the sop and asc is also demonstrated. moreover, the reduced percentage with respect to number of user examination is also given, which validates the simplicity and efficiency of our proposed scheme compared to the traditional approaches. numerical results deduce that with the proposed scheme, a comparable system performance with regard to the maximal selection (ms) scheme can be achieved.

index terms—satellite communication (satcom), secrecy outge probability (sop), average secrecy capacity (asc), threshold

this work was supported in part by the national natural science foundation of china (nos. 61971474, 61401508 and 61901502), also in part by the research project of nudt under grant zk18 02 11, also in part by the china postdoctoral science foundation funded project (no. 2019t120071), also in part by the research project of space engineering university (no. 2018xxaq07), also in part by the china's 13th five year major science and technology pre research project (no. 30803007010) and also in part by ministerial key science and technology project (no. 1600070692).

k. guo and x. tang are with the school of space information, space engineering university, beijing 101407, china; x. tang is also with the school of mechanical engineering, xi'an jiaotong university, xi'an, 710049, china (e mail: guokefeng.cool@163.com; titantxg@163.com).

k. an is with the sixty third research institute, national university of deense technology, nanjing, 210007, china (e mail:ankang89@nudt.edu.cn). b. zhang is with the college for communications engineering, army engineering university of pla, nanjing, 210007, china (e mail: bangnng zhang@sina.com).

y. huang is with the artificial intelligence research center, national innovation institute of defense technology, beijing 100039, china (e mail: yzh huang@sina.com).

g. zheng is with the wolfson school of mechanical, electrical, and manufacturing engineering, loughborough university, loughborough le11 3tu, u.k. (e mail: g.zheng@lboro.ac.uk).

intelligent systems scince and engineering, jinan university, zhuhai 519070, china (e mail: theo tsiftsis@jnu.edu.cn).

corresponding author: kefeng guo, email: guokefeng.cool@163.com and

co corresponding author: yuzhen huang, email: yzh huang@sina.com based scheduling.

d ue to the ability of seamless connectivity and high

data rate, satellite communication (satcom) has been viewed as a key element to bring real time, higher capacity communication and wider coverage in the connection and deployment of a plethora of applications such as smart grid, internet of thing (iot), wireless sensor networks, space based cloud for big data, vehicular ad hoc networks etc (see , and the references therein). it is viewed as a key element in emergency rescue, such as earthquake, fire disaster and transoceanic communication that the terrestrial communication can not cover , . satcom is the key point of the beyond 5 generation (b5g) networks, which has already attracted much attention .

nevertheless, owing to the inherent nature of satellite broadasting and coverage of huge areas, satcoms are easily to be exposed to various security issues. secure information transmission has aroused extensive interest from the wireless communications community in order to prevent eavesdroppers from taking advantage of the broadcast nature of radio propaation medium to intercept confidential messages. conventionlly, various cryptographic protocols have been developed and applied in the upper layers to achieve transmission security on the assumption of an error free link in the physical layer. however, the limitations behind these cryptographic protocols lie in secret key distribution and management, as well as its extreme computational complexity of mathematical operations . alternatively, physical layer security (pls) has been introuced as an attractive method to guarantee secure transmission by exploiting the distinct characteristics of wireless channels (e.g., fading or noise). the concept of pls was first introduced in shannon's pioneering work from an information theoretc perspective. subsequently, wiretap channel was introduced in , where it demonstrated that perfect security can be obtained when the quality of legitimate channel is superior to that of the wiretap channel. traditionally, the security issues in satcoms are also addressed by encryption, such as the advanced encryption standard (aes) , . however, the absolute security can not be perfectly guaranteed by the 1

traditional encryption method with the increasing ability of the eavesdropper's computation and decoding . moreover, pls provides a prospective approach in the satcoms when compared with such protocols e.g. tunneling may lead to significant transmission overhead in clear detriment of quality of service (qos).

the information theoretic basis in pls, such as average secrecy capacity (asc), secrecy outage probability (sop) and etc are the fundamentals for the transmission of confidential data over wireless channels . in , the authors analyzed the non zero probability of secrecy capacity, sop and asc for the satcoms in the shadowed rician (sr) channel. in , the authors investigated the secrecy performance of a hybrid satellite terrestrial relay network.

it is worth to note that future satcom systems are reuired to provide high information transfer rate to a large number of users at a reasonable cost and preferable qos . however, the aforementioned works on pls in satcoms merely considered the cases with a single legitimate user and eavesdropper, which is an unrealistic assumption and quite limited in practical scenarios. moreover, the multiuser transmission in satcoms also results in a higher opportunities for the leakage of confidential messages, thus increasing the risk of being eavesdropped. in , the authors proposed a novel optimization problem to satisfy the need to frame multiple users per transmission. in , the authors studied the problem of pre coding, scheduling and link adaptation in mobile interactive satcoms.

the former works mainly considered a single legitimate user and a single eavesdropper. in practical scenes, multiple legitimate users and eavesdroppers is a common scene in satellite communication systems . in , the secrecy performance of satcoms was analyzed with multiple legitimate users and a single eavesdropper in the satcoms. in and , the secrecy performance of satcoms with multiple legitimate users and one eavesdroppers was analyzed. in , the asc was analyzed for the satellite communication systems with a proposed legitimate users scheduling. in , the authors analyzed the secrecy performance for satellite communication systems with one user and one eavesdropper. in , the authors obtained the closed form expressions for the sop and asc of the considered network with maximal ratio combining (mrc) scheme using in the legitimate user and analyzed the pls. in , the authors analyzed the pls for the satcoms with multiple legitimate users and channel estimation errors. in , the authors investigated the outage performance for the decode and forward (df) satellite relaying network with multiple legitimate users and thresholdased scheme. in and , the authors analyzed the secrecy performance for the integrated satellite terrestrial relay networks with multiple eavesdroppers and multiple legitimate users with a single terrestrial relay. however, until now, there is few published paper analyzing the secrecy performance for satellite communication system with multiple legitimate users and multiple eavesdroppers on the foundation of user scheduling. in and , the authors analyzed the secrecy problem in hybrid satellite terrestrial relay networks with multiple legitimate users, multiple eavesdroppers and multiple terrestrial relays.

c. our contributions

in this paper, by considering the satellite links undergo sr fading and the impacts of satellite beam pattern and path loss on deploying reliable satcoms, a threshold based scheduling scheme is proposed to enhance the secrecy performance of a multiuser satellite communication system while maintaining low implementation complexity. in an effort to quantify the system performance and validate the proposed scheme, exact sop and asc, asymptotic sop and asc, along with the reduced percentage with respect to the number of legitimate user examination, are derived, respectively.

the main contributions of this paper is summarized as

we provide a secrecy satellite communication model with multiple users. particularly, a new user scheduling scheme is proposed to enhance the secrecy system perormance.

we derive the closed form expressions for the sop based on the proposed user scheduling scheme, which provide efficient ways to evaluate the sop.

to gain the impact of the proposed user scheduling scheme on the asc, the closed form expressions for the asc are also derived, which give the useful methods to estimate asc.

in order to obtain the secrecy performance at high signalo noise ratios (snrs), the asymptotic expressions for sop and asc of the considered system are obtained to show the secrecy diversity order and coding gain.

the average number of legitimate user examinations is also derived to show the advantage of our proposed user scheduling scheme.

the rest of this paper is organized as follows. section ii introduces the system model followed by the problem formuation. in section iii, the secrecy performance analysis of the considered system is conducted. in particular, the analytical expressions for the op and asc are derived. in addition, the asymptotic expressions of the op and asc under the high snr assumption are also given in section iii. in section iv, the average number of legitimate user examinations is given. in section v, some numerical results are provided to validate the analytical performance evaluation. in section vi, a brief summary of our work in this paper is given.

notations: vectors are represented by lowercase bold typeace letters, (·)h denotes the hermitian transpose, ∥·∥ repesents the euclidean norm of a vector, |·| stands for the absolute value of a complex scalar. exp (·) is the exponential function, e [·] denotes the expectation operator, cn (a; b) represents the complex gaussian distribution of a random vector a and covariance matrix b, cm ×n stands for an m by dimensional complex positive semi definite matrix. fx (·) and fx (·) denote the probability density function (pdf) and the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of random variable 2

x, respectively. the abbreviations and acronyms are given in table i.

as illustrated in fig. 1, we consider a multiuser downlink wiretap satellite network, where a satellite (alice) equipped with single antenna, nb legitimate terrestrial users (bobs) in the presence of ne eavesdroppers (eves). on the assumption 3

that all bobs and eves are equipped with single antenna, which is practical in certain multiuser scenarios such as wireless sensors, iot and broadcasting networks1. without loss of genrality, we assume that the main links and the eavesdroppers' links are subject to independent and non identically distributed (i.n.i.d) block sr fading2. for notational convenience, the channel coefficient between the satellite and the i th legitimate user is denoted as hbi, and the channel coefficient between the satellite and the j th eavesdropper is termed as hej . by exploiting time division multiple access (tdma) scheme, only a single scheduled legitimate user is in service at each time slot. let s (t) denote the confidential signal transmitted by the = 1, the signals received at the satellite satisfying e i th bob and the j th eve are, respectively, written as [ ]

where p is the transmit power at alice, nbi (t) and nej (t) are the additive white gaussian noise (awgn) at the i th bob and j th eve with zero mean and variance (cid:14)2 ej , respectively. bi specifically, hbi and hej can be uniformly written as , (cid:14)2

where gp is the channel coefficient following sr fading , , , and qp is the scaling parameter including various practical effects, such as free space loss (fsl) and on board beam gain, which is given by

where c is the light velocity, f is the frequency of the carrier, dp is the propagation distance. kw = 1:38 × 10−23j/m is the boltzman constant, tw is the receive noise temperature, and w denotes the carrier bandwidth. meanwhile, fr;p presents the receiving gain.

according to , the antenna gain for the earth station (es) with parabolic antenna can be approximately expressed as

where gmax is the maximum beam gain at the boresight, and (cid:12) is the off boresight angle.

ft;p presents the beam gain of the satellite, which can be

1we should note that, in order to simplify the analysis, we assume that all nodes are equipped with a single antenna in this paper. however, the following analysis is still fit for the case that all nodes are equipped with multiple antennas. it is very interesting for us to investigate the case that the satellite is equipped with multiple antennas in our future work. nevertheless, our presented results will serve as a benchmark of the secrecy system performance and provide useful guidelines for the secrecy land mobile satellite (lms) communication systems. 2the sr model that

is proposed originally by loo has found wide applications in different frequency bands such as the uhf band, l band, sand, and ka band , has been widely employed in many existing works , . ,, c bbb bbb bbb d e e 1,0big==1ii=+detect linkestimateibgupdate output snr i.e. ()1max,,ibbbggg= detect bin<yes yesno btgg³ ) stop g i i t t start nbbbgg=no where fmax denotes the maximal satellite beam gain and x = 2:07123 sin (cid:18)= sin (cid:18)3db, where (cid:18) is the angle between the location of the corresponding receiver and the beam carrier to the satellite, and (cid:18)3db is the 3db angle, with respect j1 and j3 present the first kind bessel function of order 1 and 3, respectively . in order to get the best system performance, hence we set (cid:18) → 0, as a result of ft;p ≈ fmax. on this foundation, we could obtain hp = qmax p gp with qmax

p = from (1a) and (1b), the instantaneous received snr at the

i th bob and the j th eve can be, respectively, given by

in this section, a comprehensive analysis on the secrecy performance of the system based on the proposed thresholdased scheme are derived.

owing to every eve has access to the source signal, several diversity combining schemes can be applied to strengthen the wiretapping. without loss of generality, we consider a worsease scenario where the eavesdroppers are geographically located in clustering environment. hence, a colluded and collaborated eavesdropping can be implemented among the multiple eves. by considering the mrc linear processing scheme among eves, we obtain the equivalent instantaneous snr of eves as3

before analyzing the secrecy performance of the system, we first give the cdf of (cid:13)bi and the pdf of (cid:13)e , respectively, as

3in this paper, we analyze the worst case, which means that all the eavesroppers cooperate with each other to wiretap the main channel information. 4

fig. 2. diagram of the proposed scheduling scheme.

2bl(2blml+ωl) with ωl, 2bl and ml (l ∈ {bi; e}) are the average power of line ofight (los), multiple path components and the fading severity parameters, respectively,

traditional scheduling schemes select the best user to be served based on the csi examination of each user, which requires computationally demanding iterative process . given the constrained feedback resources and limited on board processing capability in the satellite network, we design a threshold based user scheduling scheme for the secure transission for satcoms in the presence of multiple eves. our proposed scheme can be explained as follows:

firstly, a scheduling threshold (cid:13)t is set, alice first check the snr (cid:13)b1, if (cid:13)b1 > (cid:13)t , this transmitted link is selected, no other link will be checked, i.e., (cid:13)b = (cid:13)b1.

according to the detailed scheduling scheme, we can obtain

the following scheduling process as fig. 2. theorem 1. based on the aforementioned analysis and assumng all bobs' links having the identical fading parameters, we can obtain the cdf of (cid:13)b as

the knowledge of eavesdroppers' csi is commonly unvailable at the satellite, thus the transmission rate can not be adapted according to the csi. in this case, the sop, which is defined as the probability that the secrecy capacity falls below a predefined secrecy rate r0 , is mathematically formulated as 4

4the main channel condition here is that cb > ce , which emphasizes the fact the main channel must be better that the wiretap channel, irrespective of the eavesdroppers computational power, which is another motivation to exploit cooperative communications to provided this much desired advantages.

c. average secrecy capacity

in this subsection, in order to investigate the secrecy perforance deeply, we analyze the asc of the considered system. by recalling the definition of the achieved secrecy rate, we

from , in order to evaluate the above integrals, we first evaluate the inner integral by applying integration by parts, and after some mathematical steps, the asc can be represented as follows:

next, the closed form expression for (19) can be obtained

in the following theorem 2.

theorem 2. the asc of the considered system is

where c1 and c2 are given in (23) (shown in the middle of next page) and (24) (shown at the top of 7 th page) with h1 (a; b; c) and h2 (a; b; c) are, respectively, as follows:

proof: see appendix b.

d. asymptotic analysis

1) asymptotic secrecy outage probability: although the exact expression of sop has been obtained, it is hard to derive more insights from (13). therefore, in what follows, the 5

(22) asymptotic analysis for the sop will be derived. in the high → ∞. hence, only the first summation snr regime, i.e., (cid:13)bi term of f(cid:13)bi (x) should be taken into consideration, since it momentously affects the overall performance while all the other terms approach zero. accordingly, (8a) can be further expressed as

theorem 3. in order to analyze the diversity order and coding gain conveniently, the asymptotic sop can be expressed as

where the secrecy diversity order ψ = 1 and the secrecy coding gain is 6

2) asymptotic average secrecy capacity: in what follows, to evaluate the impact of key system parameters on the average secrecy capacity in depth, we also look into the asc at high snrs. to this end, we give two representative issues to characterize the asymptotic asc, i.e., the high snr slope and the high snr power offset. also, the cdf of (cid:13)e is given by f(cid:13)e (x) = 1 − (cid:17)(cid:13)e (x) me−1∑ me−1∑

theorem 4. the asc in high snr regime is derived as

and ei (·) is the exponential integral function [38, eq. 8.21].

to obtain further insights, we investigate the high snr slope and the high snr power offset, as two important parameters affecting the asc at high snrs. hence, we rewrite the asymptotic asc in (29) in a general form as ,

by substituting (30) into (35), it can be easily extracted that

from (36), we can conclude that the key parameters, such as the number of the legitimate users, the number of the eavesroppers, the fading severity parameters and the switching threshold (cid:13)t , have no effect on the high snr slope.

it is clear from (37) that the effects of the main channel and the eavesdropper' channel on the asymptotic asc rely on t∞. by inserting (36) and (29) into (37), we obtain t∞ as

remark 1. from the above analysis, we find that the high snr power offset is independent of (cid:13)b and the contributions of the main channel and eavesdropper channel to t∞ are ∞, respectively. in particular, t e characterized by t b ∞ quantifies the loss of asc due to eavesdropping and as t e ∞ increases with ne with asc decreasing. ∞ and t e

iv. average number of legitimate user examinations

according to the proposed scheduling scheme, once an user is acceptable, the other users will be not checked. hence the average user examinations' number can be written as

as it is fact that f(cid:13)bi

furthermore, from a more intuitive perspective, we employ the reduced percentage in terms of the number of legitimate user examinations (rpn) to justify the advantage of the proposed scheme, which can be expressed as

in this section, we perform numerical results for the aboveentioned secrecy analysis and validate the proposed scheme through monte carlo (mc) simulations by matlab. the system parameters are given in table ii and the shadowing coefcients of the satellite channel are provided in table iii , respectively. without loss of generality, we set (cid:14)2 = 1 bi and in all the plots we denote (cid:13)bi = (cid:13)b. moreover, the sr channel and the mc approach 108 iterations for figs. 1 3 and figs. 5 8, besides 1011 iterations for fig. 4.

fig. 3 plots the sop of the considered system versus (cid:13)b with (cid:13)t =5db and (cid:13)e =10db for as. as shown in this figure, we can observe that the mc simulation results are tight across the analytical results versus the whole snrs. besides we find that at high snrs, the asymptotic results are the same with the mc simulations results, which prove the correctness of our analysis. furthermore, just as we analyzed before, the secrecy diversity remains one and the key system parameters, including (cid:13)t , nb and ne, influence the system performance by affecting the secrecy coding gain. we observe that the secrecy coding gain will be lower when a larger nb or (cid:13)t is presented. in addition, we can also find that the secrecy coding gain will be degraded when ne is larger.

fig. 4 depicts the sop versus (cid:13)t with (cid:13)b =40db for different shadowing scenarios. from the figure, we know that the optimal value of (cid:13)t which means the lowest sop will change according to different channel shadowing severities. the heavier channel shadowing is, the smaller (cid:13)t will be. moreover, we can obtain that the sop will be larger with the increasing snr of the eavesdropper.

fig. 5 provides the asc versus different ¯(cid:13)b, different ¯(cid:13)e and different channel shadowing with (cid:13)t =5db, ne=1 and nb=3. we can find that, the asc will increase to be infinity when ¯(cid:13)b grows infinity. moreover, we observe that when ¯(cid:13)e is larger, the asc will be lower in the case of larger eavesdroppers' power. at end, the asc will be larger when the channel is under light shadowing.

fig. 6 examines the asc versus different ¯(cid:13)b, different ne and different (cid:13)t with ¯(cid:13)e=5db and nb=3: fhs. it can be 8

fig. 4. the sop versus (cid:13)t with (cid:13)b =40db for different shadowing scenarios.

fig. 8. the number of examined users reduction percentage versus (cid:13)t with different nb and (cid:13)b for fhs.

overcome (cid:13)t , which means every link is better enough. lastly, it is noted that when ne is larger, the asc will be lower.

fig. 7 plots the asc versus different ¯(cid:13)b, different nb and different (cid:13)t with ¯(cid:13)e=5db and ne=1: fhs. we still find that when ¯(cid:13)b is larger enough, at high snrs, the values of asc for different cases are same, which also means that all links are the suitable links to transmit the signals. however, when ¯(cid:13)b is lower, there is a turning point showing that at lower snrs (before the turning point), we should set (cid:13)t larger, at high snrs (behind the turning point, not larger enough), the lower (cid:13)t is suitable.

fig. 8 provides the reduced percentage in terms of the number of user examinations versus (cid:13)t with different nb and (cid:13)b for fhs. as illustrated in this figure, we compare our proposed scheme with the maximal selection (ms) scheme (which is the best scheduling scheme , ). intuitively, we can find that the reduced percentage of ms scheme is alays zeros, which means that all users will be examined when choosing the suitable user. however, the reduced percentage of our proposed scheme depends on the value of (cid:13)t , when (cid:13)t is large enough, the reduced percentage will decrease to zero. whereas, when reviewing the results derived from fig. 3, the lowest sop occurs with a special (cid:13)t . in this special (cid:13)t , the corresponding reduced percentage is higher enough, which validates the advantage of our proposed scheme.

in this paper, we have proposed a scheduling scheme based on the predefined threshold for the security enhancement of multiuser satellite communication networks with multiple eavesdroppers. next, closed form expressions for the sop and asc of the considered system have been derived. to get more insights at high snrs, asymptotic expressions for the sop and asc have also been obtained. moreover, the average number of user examinations were also given, which validated the simplification of our proposed scheduling scheme. we found that when the snr of the system was larger enough, (cid:13)t and nb did not affect the asc. nevertheless at lower snrs, it had serious effects. finally, numerical results have pointed out that our work has given a computationally efficient method to evaluate the secrecy performance of satcoms.

based on the proposed scheduling scheme, we can get the

since all of the satellite links undergo independent identi

cally distributed (i.i.d) sr fading, (44) can be rewritten as

before doing this, with the help of , we first give the

then, by substituting the second part of (10) and (46) into 10

then with the similar methods, j3 and j4 can be derived

will be derived.

(54) can be rewritten as

where j5 and j6 are, respectively, given by

(57) : then, using the same ways, j6 is obtained as

in order to investigate the asymptotic analysis, we should

obtain the asymptotic expressions for i1, i2 and i3.

((cid:13)t ) ≈ (cid:11)b ¯(cid:13)bi recalling (26), it can be seen that we just need the equation 3 can be rewritten as

we should note that when ¯(cid:13)b is large enough, we obtain ln (1 + x) ≈ ln x , and the snr of every bob's transmitted link is good enough to receive the signal, hence we have

to obtain the asymptotic expression for w2, we change the

order of integration in (66b) as

the proof is completed.

k. y. jo, "satellite communications netwowrk design and analysis."

norwood, ma, usa: artech house, 2011.

c. e. shannon, "communication theory of secrecy systems," bell labs

k. guo, b. zhang, y. huang, and d. guo, "secure performance analysis of satellite communication networks in shadowed rician channel," in proc. isspit 2016, dec. 2016, limassol. cyprus, pp. 156 159. v. bankey and p. k. upadhyay, "secrecy outage analysis of hyrid satellite terrestrial relay networks with opportunistic relaying schemes," 2017 ieee 85th vehicular technology conference (vtc spring), jun. 2017, sydney, nsw, pp. 1 5.

k. guo, b. zhang, and d. guo, "secure performance analysis of a satellite terrestrial networks with multi eavesdroppers," in proc. iccsnt 2017 , dalian, china, oct. 2017, pp. 1 6.

k. guo, k. an, y. huang, and b. zhang, "physical layer security of 12

multiuser satellite communication systems with channel estimation error and multiple eavesdroppers," ieee access, vol. 7, pp. 96253 96262, jul. 2019.

k. guo, k. an, and x. tang, "secrecy performance for integrated satellite terrestrial relay systems with opportunistic scheme," in proc. ieee icc 2019, shanghai china, may 2019, pp. 1 6.

v. bankey, p. k. upadhyay, "physical