precoding in multibeam satellite communications: present and future challenges

miguel ángel vázquez, ana pérez neira, dimitrios christopoulos, symeon chatzinotas, björn ottersten, pantelis daniel arapoglou, alberto ginesi, and giorgio taricco

the projection of the beam generation proess on earth by the satellite allows the simulaneous transmission of different information streams at different rates. this transmission, combined with adaptive coding and modulation (acm), can attend to the different user chanel conditions over the coverage area. howevr, reusing the frequency over the multiple spot beams generates co channel interference among adjacent ones. indeed, as there is no way of havng completely isolated spot beams, a carefully planned overlap between them is designed, leadng to a controlled carrier to co channel interfernce ratio, c/i.

consequently, the transmit signal toward a certain beam is partially radiated to the correponding adjacent beams through its antenna sidlobes. although the received power levels of the adjacent beams are not as large as the intended one, the created interference accumulates, and therefore, the communication links suffer from a degradation of the achievable signal to interfernce plus noise ratio (sinr), which depends on the ut position.

in order to cope with this intrasystem intererence, satellite operators and manufacturers try to separate the frequency bands of the adjaent beams so that the interference is mitigated. commonly for high throughput satellite (hts) systems, the frequency band is divided into four sub bands so that closer adjacent beams have disjoint frequency bands (rightmost part of fig. 2). another degree of separation between the spot beams is offered by employing orthogonal polarizations.

although this "cake cutting" spectrum manageent sufficiently alleviates the problem of multieam interference, it precludes scaling the system capacity by using all the available bandwidth in every beam. therefore, to achieve a huge leap in offered data rate services, a more aggressive use of the spectrum is desirable. notably, this vision has also been promoted in cellular systems by shifting the paradigm from single cell to multicell systems .

as a result, high frequency reuse combined feeder link

satellite user terminal multibeam coverage area

frequency 1 frequency 2 frequency 3 frequency 4 multibeam satellite precoding algorithms: multigroup multicast precoding apart from the difficulties in obtaining up to date csi at the transmitter (csit), satellite precoding substantially differs from its terrestrial counterpart due to its multicast operation, which stems from the fact that a single dvb s2x codeword (frame) contains data bits addressing multiple uts. although currently there is a tendency to add multicast modes to the cellular standards, the genral operation is a simple multiuser model where a certain number of independent symbols, k, are intended to be transmitted to k users. in contrast, in satellite communications a given codeword always needs to be decoded by more than one receiver. this phenomenon entails a decrease of the offered spectral efficiency since the ut with the lowest sinr determines the rate allocation via acm. in this context, the multibeam satelite forward link transmission is modeled by the multigroup multicast multiple input single output (miso) channel.

from early multibeam precoding studies, it was evident that linear algorithms considering only one user per frame were performing satisfactorily, providing significant capacity gains . one of the most promising designs, initially conceived for cellular communications, was regularized chanel inversion, also coined minimum mean square error (mmse) due to its similarity to the linear estiator. as a result, the first attempt to design mulicast multigroup precoding was a modification of the regularized channel inversion. this was caried out in , where all the users served by the same frame are considered as a single user with an equivalent channel equal to the average of the different channels. spectral efficiency results are encouraging considering this simple approximaion; however, the channel averaging degrades when several users are considered per frame. in order to potentially improve performance, a techique based on the block singular value decomosition (svd) method as presented in has been investigated. in that case, the precoding matrix is constructed row by row, computing the null space each time with the aim of completey rejecting the interference to the other beams. although the computational complexity increases severely, a certain gain in terms of spectral effiiency is obtained.

toward obtaining the sum rate optimal design, an optimization approach is provided in , where the authors formulate the optimization problem of multicast multigroup. although optial, this approach suffers from high computaional complexity, which should be considered in order to accommodate it in commercial satellite ground segment equipment. additionally, in the sum rate optimization for the multigroup mulicast scenario with per antenna power constraints is considered jointly with user scheduling. this joint optimization, coined as frame based', offers larger rates compared with the separated optimiation.

figure 4 depicts a 100 runs simulation for a ka band multibeam satellite system consisting of 245 spot beams. for further details of the chanel model and particularly the antenna pattern, the reader can refer to , where the overall block svd mmse frame based

users per frame

figure 5. average throughput per beam vs. users per beam when considering different user clustering techniques. perfect clustering refers to the techique of user grouping considering not only the magnitude of the channel but also the phase effect. on the contrary, guc refers to the technique that only takes into account the magnitude of the channel (i.e., its position). finally, frame based clustering considers a heuristic approach described in . 5 fields by using walsh hadamard sequences. a set of orthogonal sequences can be assigned to co channel carriers within a multi spot beam system (a unique sequence per beam). these features allow the ut to estimate the channel responses down to a very low sinr value. the beam specific orthogonal sequence allows the receiver to uniquely associate the channel estiate with the beam index. the superframe also foresees an additional precoded pilot field to help amplitude and phase recovery in support of the precoded data detection. apart from the aforeentioned features, the use of this super frame extensively helps the use of precoding due to its multicast transmission nature.

indeed, in dvb s2 as well as in dvb s2x, more than one user are allocated in the same frame in order to allow for large low density party check (ldpc) codewords, which increases the channel coding gain and the frame encapulation efficiency. in this context, the precoding matrix needs to be computed each time there is a change on the forward error correction (fec) block (i.e., group of users' coded information) for all beams. this is shown in the upper part of fig. 6, where the dotted vertical line indiates each time the precoder would need to be re computed. aside from the computational complexity of computing the precoding matrix that often, the frame format in the upper part of fig. 6 does not allow for the alignment of pilot fields among the beams. nevertheless, it should be pointed out that the more often the precodng matrix is computed, the larger spectral effiiencies can be obtained.

in order to solve this problem, dvb s2x introduced the super frame structure shown in the lower part of fig. 6, with the same number of symbols so that precoding can be applied on a per super frame basis. this structure aligns the pilot fields among the beams and also yields a periodic precoding matrix refresh period. morever, the fact that the frames are time aligned leads to a substantial reduction of the receiver complexity.

focusing on the csi feedback, when a superrame is transmitted, each ut estimates a number of channel complex coefficients corresponding to the most significant interfering beams (16 or 32). these complex numbers are quantized and signaled back to the gateway using the signaling message described in annex e of with a maxmum rate of one message every 500 ms. note that even though multibeam satellite systems usully operate with hundreds of beams, only a small fraction of them need to be estimated and detectd. this is due to the radiation pattern, which reduces the interfering power in largely separated beams.

it is important to remark that precoding can benefit from shortened codewords since in that case no user aggregation would be required. however, this would decrease the channel coding gain. therefore, a trade off analysis (codeword length and precoding gain) must be performed.

prospective gains under channel csit error although the results presented hitherto are very promising, they do not account for practial impairments experienced in a real system. in 3 users pilots

has completed his ph.d. in telecommunications in 2014 from upc, leading to a ph.d. thesis, beamforming and power conrol in spectrum sharing systems. he joined cttc in january 2010. he has been granted with a marie curie fellowship in the context of an fp7 european project (swap). moreover, he has participated in different eu funded projects (fp7, artemisa, celtic, h2020) on the topics of the internet of things and smart grid; and with industrial contracts with local companies and the european space agency. his research interests include statistical and array signal processing, spectrum sharing wireless communications, licensed shared access networks, and satellite communications.

ana i. pérez neira (sm'02) is a full professor at upc in the signal theory and communication department. her research topic is signal processing for communications, and currently she is working on multi antenna and multicarrier signal processing, for both satellite communications and wireless systems. she has been on the board of directors of etsetb (telecom barceloa) from 2000 to 2003 and vice rector for research at upc (2010 2013). she created the upc doctoral school (2011). currently, she is scientific coordinator at cttc. since 2008 she has been a member of eurasip bod (the european signal processing association) and since 2010 of ieee signal processng theory and methods (sptm). she is the coordinator of the european project sansa and of the network of excellence on satellite communications, financed by the european space agency: satnexiv. she has been the leader of 20 projects and has participated in over 50 (10 for the european space agency). she is author of 50 journal papers (20 related with satcom) and more than 200 conference papers (20 invited). she is a co author of four books and five patents (one on satcom). she has been a guest editor of five special issues and currently she is an editor of ieee transactions on signal processing and eurasip signal processing and advances in signal processing. she was the general chair of iwcld '09, eusipco '11, ew '14, and iwscs '14. she has participated in the organization of the esa confernce 1996, and is the chair of ieee icassp '20.

dimitrios christopoulos (s'03m'14) received his diploma in electrical and computer engineering from the national technial university of athens (ntua) in 2010 and his ph.d. degree in electrical engineering from the interdisciplinary center for security and trust, (snt), university of luxembourg, in 2014. affiliated with snt until 2015, he has been involved signal proessing research activities in collaboration with the european space agency and ses. as of 2016, he is a research engineer in newtec cy, belgium, involved with the development and implementation of advanced signal processing algorithms in ground based satellite communications equipment. his research interests include applied signal processing for satellite communiations, optimization methods for multiuser mimo communicaions, and receiver synchronization algorithms.

symeon chatzinotas (s'06m'09sm'13) received his m.eng. degree in telecommunications from aristotle university of thesaloniki, greece, and his m.sc. and ph.d. degrees in electronic engineering from the university of surrey, united kingdom, in 2003, 2006, and 2009, respectively. he is currently a research scientist with the sigcom research group, interdisciplinary centre for security, reliability, and trust, university of luxemourg, managing h2020, esa, and fnr projects. in the past, he has worked on numerous r&d projects for the institute of informatics telecommunications, national center for scientifc research demokritos, institute of telematics and informatcs, center of research and technology hellas, and mobile communications research group, center of communication systems research, university of surrey. he has authored more than 180 technical papers in refereed international journals, conferences, and scientific books. his research interests include multiuser information theory, cooperative/cognitive communicaions, and wireless network optimization. he is a corecipient of the 2014 distinguished contributions to satellite communicaions award, and satellite and space communications technical committee, ieee communications society, and crowncom 2015 best paper award. he is one of the editors of the book cooperative and cognitive satellite systems (elsevier, 2015) and was involved in co organizing the first international workshop on cognitive radios and networks for spectrum coexistence of satellite and terrestrial systems.

björn ottesten [s'87, m'89, sm'99, f'04] received his m.s. degree in electrical engineering and applied physics from linköping university, sweden, in 1986, and his ph.d. degree in electrical engineering from stanford university, california, in 1989. he has held research positions at the department of electrical engineering, linköping university; the informaion systems laboratory, stanford university; the katholieke