ali imran sandhu, emilio arnieri, member, ieee, giandomenico amendola, senior member, ieee, luigi boccia, member, ieee, erika meniconi, and volker ziegler, senior member, ieee

abstract— a dual band, tx/rx, self diplexing phased array is presented. the antenna has been designed to cover tx/rx satellite communications at k/ka band with a frequency ratio 1.5:1. to obtain dual band operations with a single radiating surface, a novel dual band radiator is adopted and placed in a configuration in which dual band and single band elements are interleaved. the proposed configuration reduces the number of radiating elements required by other solutions while avoiding the insurgence of grating lobes. the tightly packed arrangement of the elements poses many integration issues, which are solved with a novel integration technique. the array elements are optimized to scan the beam in excess of 50° in both bands. a subarray with 49 rx elements and 105 tx elements was built and measured confirming the results obtained in simulations.

index terms— microstrip antennas, multifrequency antennas,

m odern communication systems require highly inte

grated user terminals operating in the millimeter wave region embedding antennas with beam steering capability. examples include k/ka band satcom on the move (sotm) terminals and 60 ghz high capacity communications in complex indoor scenarios , . it is also foreseen that 5g technology for next generation wireless communication networks will rely on sophisticated beam forming capabiliies in which hand held terminals and basestations commuicate through optimum line of sight (los)/non los milimeter wave links . in all these applications, radiation boards (rbs), interconnects, beam forming networks, tx and rx modules and other circuitry have to be included in a reduced volume increasing the complexity of the integraion process. a significant milestone in this direction has been achieved with the recent introduction of multifunctional chipsets capable to contain many reconfigurable transmit (tx) and receive (rx) chains. however, there are still functionalities

manuscript received november 24, 2015; revised february 20, 2016; accepted march 28, 2016. date of publication april 11, 2016; date of current version may 30, 2016. this work was supported by the european commission under the fp7 project flexwin.

a. i. sandhu is with the king abdullah university of science and techology, jeddah 23955, saudi arabia (e mail: aliimransandhu@hotmail.com). e. arnieri, g. amendola, and l. boccia are with the university of calabria, rende 87036, italy (e mail: earnieri@deis.unical.it; amendola@deis.unical.it; luigi.boccia@unical.it).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available that are intrinsically space consuming. at the antenna level one of the main issues is that rx and tx operations are usually obtained with two separate radiating apertures thus considerably increasing the actual space occupied by the system. the design of arrays able to integrate both tx and rx operation in a single aperture is cumbersome, albeit essential. two solutions may be devised: arrays of elements with a bandwidth large enough to cover both tx and rx or arrays of dual band elements. the first solution has been largely explored , . for example, arrays of tightly coupled dipoles with ultrawideband performance have been recently studied for ku band sotm applications showing excellent scanning behavior in a wide angular range. nevertheless, this approach suffers from three inherent drawbacks. firstly, the tightly coupled dipoles configuration corresponds to a very small cell size (less than 0.3 wavelength at the highest frequency) which makes the integration of the tr modules difficult. secondly, the reduced cell size results in an increased number of elements and, consequently, of control signals thus making significantly more critical the manifold design. thirdly, as the array is not self duplexing some mechanisms to discriminate between the two bands would be required.

other dual band phased arrays have been proposed in literature mainly for synthetic aperture radar instruments operting at multiple bands , . small multiband arrays have also been designed for mobile telecommunications basesations . wide angle scanning was recently taken into account in and , designing dual band radiating eleents for x/ku phased arrays with beam steering capability down to 60°/50°.

in this paper, a new concept of compact dual band phased array supporting wide angle beam steering is presented. the proposed configuration mainly targets applications with large frequency ratios, wide scanning range, and full electronic control. the array illustrated in this paper has been conceived taking k/ka band sotm applications (rx: 20.2 21.2 ghz, tx: 29.5 30.8 ghz) with a scan angle of ±60° as a reference case. the proposed array has been designed to be integrated with multicore, sige bicmos 3.8×3.8 mm2 chips containing two rx and four tx chains designed in the framework of the eu fp7 project flexwin , .

for the application at hand, due to the tight arrangement of the radiating elements and to the ratio between the tx and rx center frequencies (1.5:1), the design of the radiating elements is particularly challenging for the following inherent reasons. firstly, the array lattice and the cell size have to be selected to avoid grating lobes in the whole scanning region. secondly, although the frequency ratio between the tx and rx bands could be covered with wide band radiators, they would not be self duplexing, thus making the chip integration significantly more complex . on the other hand, the frequency ratio is not wide enough to facilitate the design of dual band elements. to solve the two problems, a novel radiating element based on coaxial printed rings is introduced in this paper. as it will be shown, the new element can be made compact enough to be embedded in arrays with small cell sizes, it can be optimized to achieve wide scan angle and it can be easily integrated with multicore monolithic microwave integrated circuits (mmics). although the specific context of this paper is related to k/kaand sotm user terminals, its scope can be extended to other dual band phased arrays with large frequency ratio and wide scanning.

the paper is organized as follows. the concept of supermposed array and the lattice definitions are described in section ii. the dualnd single band elements are presented in section iii. simulated and measured results are shown in sections iv and v, demonstrating very good performance in terms of scanning impedance in both the end h planes.

the definition of the array lattice influences the design of a dual band phased array in several ways. the most direct impact is on the radiation performance. indeed, the proper elements' location on the radiating surface is the main means to avoid grating lobes arising within the entire scanning range and in both bands. moreover, from the array lattice depends also the number of elements present in a given radiating aperture and, in turn, the number of rx and tx rf chains required to implement the electronic beam control. finally, the interelement spacing is also crucial to allow the integration of the active chips and to enable a feasible radiating element design.

different strategies can be adopted to identify the best topology for the dual band phased array. for the case at hand, a comparative evaluation of different lattices was performed as summarized in table i. the radiating aperture was defined for each band in terms of the wavelength as (nλrx)2 and (nλtx)2 where n is an integer number and where λrx and λtx are the rx and tx wavelengths, respectively. the first example taken into account is based on two single aperture uniform arrays, namely, a square and a hexagonal lattice, designed to meet the grating lobes' constrain. a square array with a 0.5λ × 0.5λ unit cell would require 4n 2 elements for each aperture, whereas a hexagonal arrangement with a radius of 0.575λ would limit the number of elements to about 3.5n 2. for a shared aperture tx/rx phased array, the simplest conguration is to design dual band elements small enough to be placed in a cell fulfilling the grating lobes' constrains at the highest frequency. as an example, dual band radiating elements could be placed in a square lattice with a cell size of half a wavelength at 30 ghz, which will correspond to a cell of a third of a wavelength at 20 ghz, as it is shown in the third case presented in table i. although this solution fulfills the grating lobes' requirements, it would increase the number of required elements leaving limited space for the integration of

the chips. on the other hand, a hexagonal lattice would reduce the number of required elements by 13% at both frequencies. as an alternative solution, the hybrid lattice shown in fig. 1 is proposed to limit the overall number of array elements and to keep the cell size at 20 ghz and at 30 ghz independent of one another. the proposed solution is based on two arrays of rx and of tx elements superimposed. the rx elements are placed on a square lattice with a cell size equal to arx aligned to the x y axes. the tx elements are placed on an isosceles triangular lattice having base atx and height btx. the unit fig. 1. dual band array lattice with interleaved tx and rx elements.

cell of the dual band lattice is constituted by the set of three radiators highlighted in the lower part of fig. 1, namely one dual band and two tx antennas.

it is worth noticing that the proposed arrangement can be adapted to different dual band arrays but it requires singleand tx interleaved with dual band unit cells. for the case at hand and for any other application having a frequency ratio of 1.5:1, the optimal configuration would lead to arx = 0.5λrx = 0.75λtx = atx.

where θsrx and θstx is the main beam elevation for the rx and tx array, respectively. the second condition can be easily derived from the first one considering the triangular lattice as a square one rotated of 45° and with a spacing of 0.53λtx. considering a scan angle of 60° at both bands (i.e., θsrx = θstx = 60°) it can be verified that grating lobes do not arise when arx < 0.539λrx and atx < 0.7579λtx. as a further validation of the proposed configuration, grating lobe diagrams for both frequencies are shown in fig. 2. as it can be observed, grating lobes are outside the visible region for scan angles θs < 60° and for any azimuth angle.

in this section, the dual band (tx/rx) and the single band tx radiating elements required to implement the previously introduced dual band array lattice are described. in the first part, the basic concept of the array cells and their radiation characteristics is introduced, while in the second part, the design is actualized for the application at hand in an infiniterray context. fig. 2. grating lobes diagrams for the (a) 20 ghz array on a rectangular lattice and the (b) 30 ghz array on a triangular lattice. scan angle is θs = 60° in both cases. shaded region included in black dots is the visible space.

fig. 3. basic concept of the elementary cells required to implement the lattice of fig. 1. (a) single band rx antenna. (b) single band tx antenna. (c) dual band tx/rx antenna. (d) antenna stackup.

a. radiating element concept

the design of the array elements required for the impleentation of the lattice described in fig. 1 is based on two single band radiating elements as shown in fig. 3. both the rx [fig. 3(a)] and the tx [fig. 3(b)] single band radiators are made by an annular aperture surrounded by a cylindrical cage of metalized via holes forming a radiating cavity. these conducting walls help to minimize the impact of mutual coupling effects thus limiting the insurgence of side lobes. the antenna operating in the lower band (rx) has an additional shorted inner boundary implemented through a coaxial ring of via holes. the inner pad of the tx radiator is instead not grounded and it is used for fine frequency tuning and to better matching. each ring apertures are electromagnetically coupled to a microstrip by means of a rectangular slot.

the two single band structures can be combined as shown in fig. 3(c) by accommodating the radiator of fig. 3(b) inside the one of fig. 3(a) in such a way that the inner wall of metallized vias is shared between the two elements. as already shown by bhattacharyya et al. , the dual band antenna can 3 d view of the of the tx single band element: r1 = 1.65 mm,

be thus designed by optimizing the geometry so as the external and the internal antenna operate in the rx and tx band, respectively. in the rx case, due to the coaxial geometry, the antenna may propagate tem, non radiating, modes. however, if properly designed, a radiating tm mode can be excited . the proposed configuration has several unique features, which are explained as follows. dual band (tx and rx) antenas and single band tx cells can be implemented as in fig. 1 using the same three layer stack up. the radiation properties of the tx single band radiator are similar to the ones in the dual band configuration thus perfectly fitting the requirements of the array lattice proposed in section ii. furthermore, the presence of the outer via cage is crucial in avoiding leakage and excitation of parallel plate mode outside the radiator. moreover, as it will be shown in the following paragraphs, the inner coaxial via cage allows the radiators in the two bands to be designed almost independently thus significantly simplifying the overall design process.

the radiation properties of the antennas presented in the previous subsection were evaluated by taking into account a simplified model of pcb multilayer circuit as shown in figs. 4 6. two types of radiating cells were taken into account, namely the single bandcell (sbc) (tx) and the dualand cell (dbc) (tx/rx). antennas were fed through a dogone slot cut in the ground plane and coupled to a microstrip line printed in the lower part of the stack up. each antenna is thus linearly polarized being the tx and rx polarization orthogonal to each other. dual polarization or circular polarizaion, thought already demonstrated in and for similar antenna configurations, was not taken into account for this paper. interestingly, the dbc is fed through two independent microstrip lines thus resulting in a self duplexing behavior, which is highly effective in the design of the array beamorming network . the material chosen for the design is a rogers multiclad hf with εe = 3.45 and tan δ = 0.009. 3 d view of the tx rx dual band element: r3 = 3.5 mm, fig. 5. r4 = 1.84 mm, w 2 = 2.8 mm, w 3 = 1.6 mm, h 2 = 1.4 mm, and h 3 = 0.95 mm.

fig. 6. cross sectional view of the single band and dual band elements.

the overall thickness is 1.5 mm. a dielectric cover of 0.250 mm thick fastrise ds is placed on the radiating surface. notice that some of the vias are indented into the slot to reduce the cell size. the configurations shown in figs. 4 and 5 were analyzed as isolated cells using a commercial finite element simulator . the size of the sbc and dbc are taken with atx = arx = 7.5 mm. the simulated radiation patterns for the two antenna types are shown in figs. 7 9. the singleand tx antenna presents (fig. 7) a broad beam with a peak gain of 4.83 dbi and cross polarization isolation greater than 30 db in the broadside direction. it is important to note that the tx radiation properties remain almost unchanged from the single band to the dual band design though the latter configuration presents a slight degradation of the polarization properties. the rx radiator in the dbc has a gain of 4.6 dbi and cross polar radiation greater than 30 db in the whole upper hemisphere. as it can be observed in figs. 10 and 11, within the rx and tx bands the gain variation of both antennas is less than 0.5 dbi. in the same figures, are also reported the reflection coefficients and, for the dual band configuration, the coupling between the tx and rx radiators. the geometry of both antennas was optimized to obtain good impedance match to 50 (cid:6) in the whole bands without requiring additional matching networks. as noticed in the previous section, the two antennas are highly isolated especially in the lower band because at this frequency the inner radiator is in cutoff. fig. 7. single band tx antenna: simulated copolar and cross polar radiation patterns in the two main plane cuts.

fig. 8. dual band antenna in rx mode: simulated copolar and cross polar radiation patterns in the two main plane cuts. fig. 10. simulated single band tx antenna: reflection coefficient and gain.

through the chips introduced in . as discussed in , the proper implementation of this type of architecture requires adopting a complex multilayer stack up comprising different types of vertical transitions. in particular, the reduced grid size leaves limited routing space to implement the distriution network (dn) and to integrate the multicore chips. for this reason, in this paper the dn was split into two parts: a microstrip at the base of the stack up and a stripline in the intermediate layer sl. a complete stackup used for the design of the array is shown in fig. 12. the nth ground metal layer is indicated with the symbol gn, while the nth dielectric layer with dn. each cell is fed through a stripline that is connected to a vertical transition (via 3 in fig. 12) to give access to the microstrip ml and to the active devices (mmic).

in figs. 13 and 14, the cross sectional view is reported along with an exploded view of the dbc and of the sbc integrated with a simple dn. dimensions given in the caption are relevant to a radiating element optimized in an infinite array configuration. as it can be noticed, the structure is fig. 13. exploded 3 d view of the sbc integrated with a simple beamorming network: r3 = 3.2 mm, h 6 = 0.85 mm, h 7 = 1.5 mm, h 8 = 2.1 mm, w 8 = 1.6 mm, w 9 = 3.5 mm, and w 10 = 3.1 mm.

divided, and fabricated, in two parts: an rb (layers d1, g1, d2, and g2) and a dn manifold (dnm) (g3, d3, d4, g4, d5, g5, and d6). the possibility to have two independent stackups allows the implementation of more complex via configurations, which will be essential in the design of the final phased array prototype where additional layers have to be included to allocate the digital bus, the control and the bias lines (d5 in fig. 13). indeed, by using the conducting adhesive layer the rb and the dnm can be fabricated with two separate processes making easier the realization of comlicated multilayer structure. the two parts are glued together by means of an adhesive conducting foil loctite abelstick fig. 14. exploded 3 d view of the dual band array cells (dbc) integrated with a simple beam forming network: r1 = 3.5 mm, r2 = 1.7 mm, h 1 = 1.4 mm, h 2 = 0.65 mm, h 3 = 1.5 mm, h 4 = 1.8 mm, h 5 = 2.7 mm, w 1 = 2.8 mm, w 2 = 1.68 mm, w 3 = 2.2 mm, w 4 = 3.5 mm, w 5 = 0.27 mm, w 6 = 4.5 mm, and w 7 = 7.5 mm.

proprieties of the via holes shown in fig. 13

placed between metal layers g2 and g3. the glued ground planes (g2 and g3) have twin slots through which the radiators are coupled to the feeding striplines. to allow the twin slots to couple, rectangular non resonant cavities are realized in the conducting adhesive layer as shown in figs. 12 14. a detailed description of the stackup is shown in fig. 12, while table ii summarizes the proprieties of the three types of via used in the demonstrator presented in this paper.

a number of vias have been used between g1 and g2 (see via 1 in fig. 12 and table ii) to implement the coaxial structure required for the dual band and single band radiatng elements described in section iii a. blind vias between g3 and g4 (see via 2 in fig. 12 and table ii) have been used to realize a cage surrounding the striplines and the slots on g3 to avoid the excitation of unwanted parallel plate modes and to reduce coupling between the two slots. the lower part of figs. 13 and 14 show the quasi coaxial vertical transition used to connect the feeding striplines to the microstrips under d6 where active devices can be placed. fig. 15. simplified infinite array setup configurations for the analysis of the tx radiator. the unit cell is identified rotating the axes around the z axis at 45°. (a) unit cell definition. (b) master/slave condition.

vias between g3 and the layer containing microstrips (via 3 in fig. 12 and table ii) have been used to realize the quasi coaxial transition. in particular, the realization of these transitions requires two different types of vias: grounding vias (from ml to g3) and a central signal via (from ml to sl). in order to reduce the manufacturing complexity, a single type of via (via 3 from ml to g3) has been used for all vias. in a second manufacturing phase, a back drilling process has been used to remove the unused section (from g3 to sl) of the central signal via.

the active impedance of the proposed radiating elements shown in figs. 13 and 14 was evaluated within the entire scanning range by means of hfss simulations in infinite array configurations. it is worth noticing that, as shown in fig. 1, the smallest unit cell of the dual band lattice is constituted by a subarray of three radiators, namely one dbcs and two sbcs. however, the evaluation of the active impedance at various scan angles with this type of cell is not straightforward . in fact, the floquet analysis applied to this elementary cell would give results valid for the subarray but not for the single element. in particular, in a master slave linked boundary configuration, the phases of like the one used in hfss, each radiator in sub array cell cannot be directly linked to the phase difference between the vertical master and slave boundaries, which are in turn used to identify the scan angle. fig. 16. simplified infinite array setup configuration for the analysis of the rx radiator. two sets of master/slave conditions have been used as the bfn stackup is shifted along the y axis with respect to the radiating board. (a) unit cell definition. (b) master/slave conditions.

for this reason, two distinct set ups, shown in figs. 15 and 16, were used to validate the array performance.

considering the lattice shown in fig. 1, the rx radiator was simulated in a dbc configuration with a cell size of arx = 0.5λ20 = 7.5 mm, while the tx radiator was analyzed in a cell having a side of btx = 5.3 mm and rotated of 45° with respect to the main axis. as it will be shown in the next section, although this simulation setup does not fully reflect the array lattice shown in fig. 1, it proved to be sufficiently accurate in predicting the input impedance and the radiation characteristics of all radiating elements.

shown impedances are repren fig. 17(a) (d) where the input sented in the smith chart for scanning angles θ = 0°, 20°, 40°, 50°, 60° in the two main planes. as it can be observed, for the rx element configuration results are acceptable in both e and h planes in the whole scanning range. the tx element has an excellent matching on the e plane but presents severe mismatch on the h plane at scan angles larger than 30°. to improve the tx cell performance, a wide angle impedance matching layer (waim) was introduced as suggested in by adding a dielectric layer of thickness 0.13 mm and with εr = 6.15, (i.e., rogers ro3006) 0.94 mm above the raditing cells. as it can be observed in fig. 17(e) (h), the presence of the waim improves the scanning capabilities of the array, in particular on the h plane, for scan angles down to 60°. simulation results in two configurations are

fig. 17. smith chart representation of the simulated active input impedance of the rx and tx elements embedded into an infinite array for different scan angles (θs = 0°, 20°, 40°, 50°, 60°) on the end h planes. (a) (d) are obtained without waim. (e) (h) in the right column are obtained by including a 0.13 mm thick waim layer placed at a distance of 0.94 mm from d1 and with εr = 6.15 (rogers ro 3006). square and circular markers indicate the start and stop frequencies edges, respectively.

to better appreciate the behavior of the array elements, the input port for the the active reflection coefficients at cases presented in fig. 17 for the case with waim layer in place are shown in figs. 18(a) and (b) and 19(a) and (b). spikes due to unwanted resonances are present in the rx band for scanning angle ±60° in both e and h planes, active s11 of the rx elements scanning on the (a) e plane

while, the antenna is unmatched when scanned to 60° even if no scan blindness spikes are observed. no further optimization has been attempted to improve scan properties at 60°. fig. 20. array prototype test structure. (a) layer g1. (b) layer g2 or g3. blind vias used to create cavities around the slots are also visible. (c) bottom view.

v. experimental validation

the experimental validation of the scanning performance of the rx and tx antenna elements was carried out measuring their active radiation patterns and evaluating the scanning range as done in and . the array prototype used to measure the active patterns is shown in fig. 20, where the raditors (layer g1 in fig. 14) are revealed without the dielectric cover. the prototype is composed by a 7 × 7 square array of rx/tx elements interleaved with an array of tx elements. in total, the array is populated by 49 rx tx and 56 tx cells. only the central dual band array element is connectorized, while the other cells are terminated to 50 (cid:6) chip resistors as shown in fig. 20(c). this configuration allows validation the presence of blind angles through the measurement of the active element radiation pattern of the central element embedded into a relevant array environment. in this test scenario, scan blindness in a phased array configuration can be revealed by the presence of nulls measured radiation patterns of the embedded element. fig. 21. x ray image of the conductive adhesive layer between g2 and g3 with two side views of the same layer.

fig. 22. return loss of the central rx element (circled in red) of the array shown in fig. 20.

through a sequential build up pcb process requiring three production stages. in the first and second phase, the radiating board (from d1 to g2) and the bfn manifold (from g3 to d6) were fabricated independently. in a third phase, the two boards were aligned and bonded through a conductive adhesive layer, ca, in a thermally controlled press. the layer ca was implemented using the loctite abelstik material, which provides high electrical and thermal conductivity as well as low curing temperature.

involved three types of slots, namely one of the tx and two of the dual band antennas. the same slot layout was replicated identically in layers g2 and g3 [fig. 20(b)] while slightly larger apertures where created in the adhesive conducting layer ca. the effeciveness of the proposed integration approach was firstly validated through x rays and cross sectional measurements of the bonded layers. as it can be observed in fig. 21, the maximum measured misalignment between the two boards in the horizontal plan is equal to 19 μm. it has been verified fig. 24. copolar and cross polar radiation patterns at 20 ghz of the central rx element of the array shown in fig. 21(a). solid line: e plane. dashed line: h plane.

through simulations that misalignments up to 50 μm have no effect on the antenna performance.

the simulated and measured reflection coefficients of the embedded element are shown in figs. 22 and 23. the rx and tx element's performance are well consistent with the numerical results showing a measured bandwidth equal from 20.15 to 21.86 ghz and from 29.6 to 31.28 ghz for the rx and tx case, respectively. fig. 26. array scanning performance based on the measured embedded element patterns. (a) scanning along the e plane at 20 ghz. (b) scanning along the h plane at 20 ghz. (c) scanning along the e plane at 30 ghz. (d) scanning along the h plane at 30 ghz. in both cases, copolar radiation patterns present broad beams without any null within the hemispherical coverage, which in turn results in wide angle scanning performance. a gain of 4.4 dbi was determined for both the tx and rx embedded elements by using the friis formula and a standard gain horn. in both operational bands the cross polarization levels are well below 20 db for the tx antenna, whereas values higher than the simulated ones can be observed in the rx antenna in the h plane. this behavior is ascribed to an imperfect shielding of the outer conductor, which deviates the electric field lines. the evaluation of the scanning performance of the arrays was done using the embedded radiation patterns shown in figs. 24 and 25 to generate array patterns pointing down to θ = 60° in both e and h planes. results, presented in fig. 26, were obtained simulating a uniformly excited array. superimposed to the array pattern are the element pattern and the ideal cosθ pattern. as it can be seen, grating lobe free patterns are obtained for scan angle up to 50°. at 60°, grating lobes appear in rx because cell size is exactly λ/2 at 20 ghz.

in this paper, a dual band phased array configuration, operating at k/ka band has been studied and experimenally validated. the proposed solution consists of dual band radiating elements interleaved with single band elements. the interleaved configuration limits the number of elements in the array and it avoids the use of multiband or wideband radiators, which may be cumbersome to design and to integrate. the radiating elements are designed to be integrated with multicore sige bicmos chips, and they are optimized to scan the beam to more than 50° in both the e plane and the h plane. a new integration technique was introduced to enable more complex and dense pcb configuration. with the proposed integration technique, it is possible to split the realization of the rn and of the bfn manifold in two separate processes, facilitating the realization of the antenna and the integration of the multicore chips. while the paper focused on k/ka band satellite communications, the solution proposed has a more general validity and it may be applied to different applications that require dual band highly integrated arrays with a large bands separation.

the authors would like to thank prof. s. gao and the staff of the antenna laboratory at the university of kent, canterbury, u.k., for their support in antenna measurements.

w. a. imbriale, s. gao, and l. boccia, space antenna handbook.

new york, ny, usa: wiley, 2012. study and design of wide band widescan dual polarized tapered slot antenna arrays," ieee trans. antennas propag., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 879 886, jun. 2000.

d. cavallo et al., "ku band dual polarized array of connected for satcom terminals: theory and hardware validation," (eucap), apr. 2013,

s. gao et al., "a ka/x band digital beamforming synthetic aperture radar for earth observation," in proc. 7th int. conf. recent adv. space technol. (rast), jun. 2015, pp. 681 686.

l. boccia et al., "sige bicmos technology for ka band satcom terminals," in proc. 8th eur. conf. antennas 2014,

l. boccia et al., "satcom rx/tx user terminal antennas with inteligent pixels," in proc. esa workshop satcom user terminal, 2012, pp. 1 8.

y. t. lo and s. w. lee, eds., antenna handbook. boston, ma, usa:

f. greco, g. amendola, e. arnieri, l. boccia, and a. i. sandhu, for ka band satcom in proc. 8th eur. conf. antennas 2014,

e. g. magill and h. a. wheeler, "wide angle impedance matching of a planar array antenna by a dielectric sheet," in proc. antennas propag. soc. int. symp., vol. 3. aug. 1965, pp. 164 169. ali imran sandhu received the b.s. degree in electronics engineering from the comsats instiute of information technology (ciit), islamabad, pakistan, in 2007, and the m.s. degree in commuication engineering from the chalmers university of science and technology, gothenburg, sweden, in 2010. he is currently pursuing the ph.d. degree in electrical engineering with the division of comuter, electrical, and mathematical sciences and engineering, king abdullah university of science and technology, jeddah, saudi arabia.

he has been a lecturer with the department of electrical engineering, ciit at lahore, lahore, pakistan, since 2007. from 2011 to 2013, he was a research engineer with the microwave laboratory, university of calabria, rende, italy. his current research interests include inverse electromagnetic scattering problems with an emphasis on sparsity promoting regularization schemes and microstrip antennas.

emilio arnieri (s'05 m'07) was born in cosenza, italy, in 1977. he received the degree (hons.) in information technology engineering from the uniersity of calabria, rende, italy, in 2003, and the ph.d. degree in electronics engineering from the university mediterranea of reggio calabria, reggio calabria, italy, in 2007.

he is currently an assistant professor with the department of informatics, modeling, electronics and system engineering, university of calabria. his current research interests include the develpment of dual band antennas and millimeter wave components, synthetic aperture radar, development of numerical methods for the electromagnetic modeling of microwave, and millimeter wave circuits (substrate integrated circuits, slotted substrate integrated waveguide arrays, and substrate integrated waveguide resonators).

circuits. giandomenico amendola (m'96 sm'15) received the electrical engineering degree from the univerity of calabria, rende, italy, in 1987.

he was a research fellow with the proton synchrotron division, european center for nuclear research, geneva, switzerland, from 1988 to 1992. he is currently with the department of informatcs, modeling, electronics and system engineering, university of calabria, as an associate professor. his current research interests include antennas, phased arrays, and microwave and millimeter wave

he has been an assistant professor of electroagnetics with the faculty of engineering, univerity of calabria, since 2005. he is currently the co editor of the book entitled space antenna handook (wiley, 2012). his current research interests include low multipath global navigation satellite system antennas, reflectarrays, beam scanning antennas, and micro and millimeter wave ic design.

dr. boccia is also a member of the european microwave association and the società italiana di elettromagnetismo. he serves as a technical reviewer for many international journals and conferences.