jun xiang yeo, yee hui lee, member, ieee, and jin teong ong

abstract—this paper proposes a model for predicting rain atenuation in the tropical region. slant path rain attenuation meaurements were carried out in singapore by analyzing the beacon signals from two satellites, namely winds and ge23, operating at frequencies of 18.9 and 12.75 ghz, respectively. rainfall rates at the location of the beacon receivers were recorded. the cumulative distributions of the rainfall rate and the corresponding rain attenation are presented and analyzed. it is found that the cumulative distribution of the measured rainfall rate is close to that predicted by the itu r model. measurement data from a total of nine counries are compared with four existing rain attenuation prediction models, namely the yamada, dah, karasawa, and ramachandran models. results show that although three of these models have relaively good prediction capability for the tropical region, they could be improved. therefore, in this paper, a slant path rain attenuaion model suitable for the tropical region is proposed. this is done by using the complementary cumulative distributions of rain atenuation for satellite links measured in singapore and five other tropical countries. the proposed model is found to outperform exsting models.

index terms—earth satellite communication, rain attenuation

p ropagation impairments that affect satellite links in

clude gaseous absorption, cloud attenuation and rain fade in troposphere. rain attenuation is considered as the dominant impairment as it gives rise to the largest amount of loss. this loss results in a degradation of the satellite to ground link and therefore affects the reliability and performance of satellite communication links , . as the frequency spectrum becomes increasingly crowded, satellite to ground communiation links are shifting to higher frequencies, from c band to the current ku band and ka band. however, path attenuation becomes much more severe in these higher frequency bands. for example, according to the itu r model for specific attenution , at a rainfall rate of 150 mm/hr that is not uncommon in the tropics, an attenuation of up to 14.5 db/km is observed at 18.9 ghz in the ka band. the same rainfall rate causes a 5 db/km attenuation at 12.5 ghz in the ku band. the amount of attenuation on satellite to ground slant path links not only depends on the rainfall rate and frequency, but also other factors

manuscript received march 06, 2014; revised august 14, 2014; accepted september 03, 2014. date of publication september 16, 2014; date of current version october 28, 2014. this work was supported by the defence science and technology agency (dsta).

the authors are with the division of communications engineering, school of electrical and electronic engineering, nanyang technological university, singapore (e mail: jxyeo@ntu.edu.sg). such as elevation angle, slant path length, drop size distribution (dsd) and polarization. therefore, in order to estimate the amount of rain attenuation on a satellite to ground slant path and to design cost effective satellite communication links in tropical regions, an accurate rain attenuation prediction model is essential.

rain attenuation prediction models can be categorized into empirical and semi physical models. an empirical model is contructed based on the statistical fitting of the measurement dataase. a physical model attempts to reproduce the physical beavior involved in the attenuation process . several rain atenuation prediction models have been developed based on meaurement data collected from temperate regions. most of these existing models do not perform well in high rainfall rate regions, such as the tropics.

the bryant model , sc excell model , and crane two component model are examples of physical rain attenation prediction models. crane's two component model disinguishes between the attenuation due to convective rain cells and the widespread debris that surround the cell. the model assumes the vertical profile of rainfall rate to be uniform. the sc excell model considers the effect of convective and stratform rain separately and is based on the older excell model , . the bryant model uses the concept of breakpoint in the rainfall rate exceedance curve. the attenuation exceedances depend on the shape of the measured rainfall rate exceedance curve. two recent models from greece , suggest that rainfall rate and rain attenuation can be modelled with an inerse gaussian (ig) or gamma distribution, the latter exhibiting a better fit. since the semi physical models use the statistics of measured rain rate together with some site specific physical paameters, they show better prediction ability. however, not all the site specific physical parameters are available. therefore, most of the widely accepted models for the prediction of slant path rain attenuation are empirical models instead of semi physcal models.

the itu r model is currently widely used by many reearchers. itu r p.618 5 , also known as yamada model , tends to underestimate the rain attenuation in the tropics since it was developed based mainly on measurement data from temperate regions. itu r p.618 11 , the dah model , is the latest rain attenuation model recommended by itu r. it has a very good prediction performance for rain attenuation in temperate countries. however, this model tends to underestimate attenuation in the tropics , , . therefore, several rain attenuation prediction models were proposed especially for the tropical region. karasawa's model was accepted by the european space agency as a suitble model for the tropics. it was designed to enhance the prediction performance at lower probability exceedance levels. the ramachandran model is a modified version of the dah model that uses the concept of a "breakpoint." at the breakpoint of exceeding 0.01% of time in the dah model, this point is changed to exceeding 0.021% of time. by introducing this "breakpoint," the ramachandran model achieves a better prediction performance for the tropical region than the dah model.

in this paper, the results of rain attenuation on both ku band and ka band satellite links in the tropical region are analyzed. the measured statistics of experimental results from nine tropcal countries are compared with the four rain attenuation preiction models discussed above. the analysis shows that the existing models do not predict the slant path rain attenuation accurately. therefore, based on the extensive satellite link meaurement data mentioned above, a systematic approach is used to propose a rain attenuation model for the tropical region. this proposed model achieves high accuracy in the tropical climate and can be used to predict the cumulative distribution of rain attenuation.

the analysis of earth satellite path rain attenuation is performed based on two sets of beacon rain attenuation meaurements from winds and ge23 geostationary satellites, respectively. the measurement site is located at nanyang technological university (ntu) in singapore (lat: 1.34 n, lon: 103.68 e).

the beacon signal from the "kizuna" wideband internetorking engineering test and demonstration satellite (winds) satellite, located at 143 e, has a frequency of 18.9 ghz, an eleation angle of 44.5 , and is left hand circularly polarized. the beacon signal from the general electric 23 (ge23) satellite, located at 172 e, has a frequency of 12.75 ghz, an elevation angle of 13.2 , and is linearly polarized.

the winds beacon signal is recorded continuously by the beacon receiver at an average sampling rate of 516 samples per minute. the dynamic range of attenuation of the measurement is approximately 40 db below the clear sky level . the ge23 beacon signal is sampled at a rate of 43 samples per minute with an approximate dynamic range of 25 db below the clear sky level.

all the measured beacon signals undergo a 6th order butterorth low pass filtering with the cutoff frequency of 40 mhz in order to remove spurious signals and scintillations . subequently, rain attenuation data is obtained by measuring the difference in beacon signal strength during the rain event and 30 minutes before, in order to minimize the attenuation due to gaseous absorption, cloud and melting layer. a comparison of the rain attenuation measured by the beacon receivers with that simulated by radar data shows a good match . fig. 1. ccdf of rainfall rate from the year 2009 to 2012.

weather data every minute including temperature, humidity, dew point, pressure, surface wind speed and direction, rainfall rate, solar radiation and solar energy. the resolution of the tipping bucket rain gauge is 0.2 mm/tip. hence, the equivalent rainfall rate step size per tip is 12 mm/hr.

iii. experimental results

a. rain rate analysis

the rainfall rate data from the years 2009 to 2012 are recorded by the tipping bucket rain gauge of the weather station. the yearly complimentary cumulative distribution functions (ccdf) of 4 years rainfall rate are shown in fig. 1. the experimental measured statistics are compared with the itu r p.837 5 model . fig. 1 shows that the ccdf of rainfall rate predicted by the itu r model matches well with the measured data in the tropical region. the rainfall rate at 0.01% of the time, r , is about 106 mm/hr. this parameter will be used in the rain attenuation prediction model. for sites where r is unknown, the itu r p.837 5 can be used to estimate the r rainfall rate parameter. in this paper, the experimental measured rainfall rate will be used in the rest of analysis.

b. rain attenuation analysis

the beacon signals from winds and ge23 satellites are recorded continuously from 2009 to 2012. however, due to the high system down time for the beacon receiver of the winds satellite in the year 2012, only 2009 2011 are used in the analsis of rain attenuation.

the three year ccdf of rain attenuation along the winds propagation path is shown in fig. 2. the ccdf is compared with itu r p.618 11 , which is also known as the dah model. the yearly ccdfs are close to each other because of the similar rainfall distribution throughout the years. the dah model can predict better at low attenuation (below 10 db, below 0.5% of time) but tends to underestimate the higher attenuation (above 10 db, above 0.5% of time). that may be due to the fig. 2. ccdf of winds attenuation from the year 2009 to 2011.

fact that the dah model is based mainly on a rain attenuation database from the temperate region.

rain events in the temperate region are mainly stratiform rain, commonly associated with lower rainfall rates. rain events in the tropical region on the other hand are mainly convective rain and therefore commonly associated with high rainfall rates. more than 80% of the rain events in singapore are convective . note that the dynamic range of the winds beacon reeiver is about 40 db, which is high enough to prevent saturaion effects for the percentage of time larger than 0.01%.

ccdf of rain attenuation for four years suffered by the ge23 propagation path are shown in fig. 3. since the dynamic range of the spectrum analyzer used to record the ge23 beacon signal is about 25 db, the ccdf saturates above the 25 db level and should not be considered for analysis and modeling. similarly for the winds link, the itu r model underestimates the attenation of the ge23 link. a. model description

the proposed rain attenuation prediction model is similar to the itu r model where the rainfall rate at 0.01% of probability level is used as one of the inputs to the model. due to the inomogeneity in rainfall along the slant propagation path, a path adjustment factor is used to account for this in the prediction model . the attenuation exceeded for 0.01% of an average year can then be obtained as

where the frequency, link elevation and polarization dependent can be calculated from the equations for the and factors of itu r p.838 3 model ; is the rainfall rate exceeded for 0.01% probability level of an average year; is the slant path length (km); and

is the path adjustment factor. the frequency, path elevation angle and the point rainfall rate at the measurement site are expected to affect the value of the path adjustment factor, . radar data is used to find the relaionship of with these factors. as shown in , the rainfall rate and slant path attenuation can be calculated from the radar reflectivity data. therefore, the path adjustment factor of any propagation path can be obtained by

five measurement sites in different parts of singapore, namely north, west, center, east, and south, are used to calculate the path adjustment factor. the radar reflectivity along the earth space path with elevation angles of 10 , 30 , 50 , 70 , and 90 at the five stations are extracted to calculate the attenuation for different frequencies. the frequency ranges from 10 to 30 ghz at intervals of 2.5 ghz are examined.

fig. 4 shows the effect of frequency on the adjustment factor for a constant elevation angle of 50 . fig. 5 shows the effect of elevation angle on the adjustment factor when the frequency is fixed at 20 ghz. fig. 6 shows the effect of rainfall rate and rain height on the adjustment factor for elevation angle kept constant at 50 and frequency, at 20 ghz. as shown in the figures, it is found that the inverse of the adjustment factor is related linearly to the frequency ( , ghz) [fig. 4], cosecant of the elevation angle ( , degree) [fig. 5], and also to the product of rainfall rate at 0.01% of time ( , km) [fig. 6]. therefore, the path adjustment factor can be deduced as , mm/hr) and rain height (

where is the altitude of the ground site above sea level (km).

b. model parameters

the proposed model is derived based on measurement data from six tropical countries, namely, brazil, papua new guinea, indonesia, malaysia, thailand, and singapore. the details of the measurement setup for the data collected are summarized in table i. the remaining data sources in table i, i.e., from (1)

(3) fig. 4. effect of frequency on the path adjustment factor

fig. 5. effect of elevation angle on the path adjustment factor (

cameroon, nigeria, and the netherlands, will be used as test sets to verify the performance of the proposed model. the data from the netherlands is used to represent data from the temerate region.

by performing a least squares fitting to the 8 sets of measure

ment data, the constants of (3) are obtained to be fig. 6. effect of rainfall rate and rain height on the path adjustment factor ( 20 ghz, ).

table i measurement sites characteristics

similar to the itu r model, the attenuation to be exceeded can be estimated

for other percentage of an average year from

where equation at the bottom of the page hold, where of the measurement site. , and the is the latitude

the step by step procedure of the proposed rain attenuation

prediction model is given in the appendix. in order to compare the performances of the prediction models, the errors between the beacon measured attenuation and the attenuations predicted from the five models are shown in table ii. the statistics of the attenuation difference are calulated based on the formula in itu r rec. p.311 13 . the numbers listed in table ii are the rms error between the model and the measured data. each model is given a ranking based on its fitness. among the five models, the best model with lowest root mean square (rms) error will have the ranking score of 5, whereas the worst model will have a ranking score of 1. the ranking scores are shown in the brackets that besides the values of rms error.

the yamada model has the worst prediction performance. the average rms error of this model is the highest value at only 0.35, with the overall performance score of 17. this is as expected since the itu r replaced the yamada model with the dah model due to its poor performance.

the karasawa model only has a poor prediction performance with the score of 15 (average rms error of 0.34), even though it was designed for the tropical region. the ramachandran model has a correction factor that depends on the elevation angle of the path. however, the formula of the correction factor is only applicable for elevation angles greater than 16.1 . therefore, the model has a large prediction error for the ge23 satellite path with elevation angle of 13.2 in singapore as shown in table ii. otherwise, in general, the ramachandran model achieves a good prediction performance, with best results for papua new guinea and nigeria. therefore, the overall score of the ramachandran model is 28, with an average rms error of 0.20 (excluding the site singapore ge23 because of the low elevation).

the dah model is the most widely accepted global model of rain attenuation. it is the best empirical model that scored highest for the itu r rain attenuation data bank . this model tends to underestimate the high rain attenuation in tropical region. however, due to the large data bank used to fig. 7. ccdf of rain attenuation at cameroon ( 11.6 ghz;

fig. 8. ccdf of rain attenuation at nigeria ( 11.6 ghz;

establish this model, including various tropical data, this model tends to perform relatively well with an overall performance score of 27 (average rms error of 0.21).

our proposed model has the highest overall performance score of 33 and lowest rms error of 0.16. with its systemtically derived path reduction factor, our model is highly accurate and best matches the measurement data in the tropics. as shown in table ii, it outperforms the other models almost everywhere. it has the lowest average rms error of 0.16 and the best prediction performance in brazil, malaysia, and singapore.

vi. verification of proposed model

in order to verify the prediction performance of the proposed model in other tropical countries and the temperate region, figs. 7 9 show the ccdf of measured and predicted rain attenuation at cameroon, nigeria, and eindhoven as listed in table i. ).

). the dah model tends to underestimate the measured rain attenuation for cameroon [fig. 7], whereas the ramachandran model overestimates the rain attenuation. the yamada, karaawa, and proposed models have the best prediction perforance. a similar conclusion is drawn from fig. 8 for nigeria. the average rms errors of the yamada, dah, karasawa, raachandran, and proposed models are 0.17, 0.31, 0.16, 0.22, and 0.13, respectively. again, the proposed model outperforms all others in tropical regions.

the itu r models (dah and yamada) do well in the temerate climate as shown in fig. 9 for the data from eindhoven. the average rms errors of the yamada, dah, karasawa, raachandran, and proposed models are 0.09, 0.16, 0.39, 0.25, and 0.25, respectively. the proposed model ranks third amongst five models, as it tends to overestimate rain attenuation in the temperate region.

in this paper, an accurate rain attenuation prediction model is proposed for the tropical climate. rainfall rate and rain attenution measurements for the tropical region in both the ka band (winds) and ku band (ge23), together with measurement data from five other tropical countries were used to design the model. the path reduction factor is found to be dependent on the elevation angle, rainfall rate at 0.01% of time, rain height, and frequency. it was derived systematically by allowing only one of these parameters to vary at any point in time.

the measured rain attenuation is compared with the proposed rain attenuation model and four existing rain attenuation preiction models (yamada, dah, karasawa, and ramachandran). the yamada model has the worst prediction result for all meaurement results obtained from the tropical region. both the karasawa model and the ramachandran model can predict the rain attenuation in the tropical region fairly well. the dah model tends to underestimate the rain attenuation from convecive rain events with very high rainfall rate as is common in the tropical region. however, due to the large data bank used to deive this model, the dah model performs well.

after testing our proposed model and four existing models on data from eight tropical countries, the model proposed in this paper is found to be the best. furthermore, the proposed model is easy to implement by using only rainfall rate at 0.01% perentage of time, , from either the local measured rainfall rate data or itu r p.837 5 model.

appendix step by step procedure for attenuation prediction

step 1: the path adjustment factor, , can be deduced as

is the elevation angle of the path (degrees); is the rainfall rate exceeded for 0.01% probs the is the altitude of the ground ,

ability level of an average year (mm/hr); rain height (km); site (km); and then is the frequency (ghz). if

step 2: the attenuation exceeded for 0.01% of an average

year can then be obtained from

where the frequency, link elevation, and polarization dependent factors of can be calculated from and the equations for the itu r p.838 3 model ; is the slant path length; and is the path adjustment factor.

step 3: the attenuation to be exceeded for other percentage

of an average year can be estimated from

, and the equation at the bottom of the page is the latitude of the measurement

hold, where site (degrees).