li zhen, hao qin, bin song, member, ieee, rui ding, xiaojiang du, senior member, ieee, and mohsen guizani, fellow, ieee

abstract—reasonable design and effective detection of the random access (ra) preamble has become a challenging task due to the unique characteristics of mobile satellite communications. to tackle this challenge, in this paper, we first design a universal long sequence structure by concatenating multiple short zadoffhu (zc) sequences that are insensitive to carrier frequency offset (cfo), and then propose the new principles of parameter selection for short sequences to ensure the minimum utilization of root sequence and the independence of the cyclic shift offset on the beam radius. to further reduce the detection complexity and improve the multi user access performance, a fast timing detection approach is also presented by leveraging the piecewise cumulative detection and the multi peaks joint estimation to obtain an accurate timing advance (ta) for each access user. simulation results and complexity analysis validate the effectiveess of the new preamble in a typical satellite communication environment, and reveal that the proposed timing detection can achieve the robustness to cfo and offer outstanding performance improvements especially in multi user scenarios, while having a notably reduced computational complexity.

m obile satellite communication is becoming an indis

pensable component of the future communication netork able to support the realization of the required flexibility and seamless coverage for providing broadband and broadcast services in military, commercial, professional, and emergency scenarios . one of the pivotal factors for the effective deployment of mobile satellite systems in the emerging fifth generation of mobile communication (5g) network is the maximized utilization of the technology commonalities with the terrestrial systems, so as to keep implementation costs to a minimum, while simplifying interactive procedures. an appropriate scheme to achieve this target lies in regarding the terrestrial radio interface as a normative reference for the satellite radio interface, introducing only those modifications

this work was supported in part by the national natural science foundation of china under grants 61372068 and 61772387, in part by the isn state key laboratory, and in part by the us national science foundation under grant cns 1564128. (corresponding author: bin song.)

l. zhen, h. qin and b. song are with the state key labratory of integrated services networks, xidian university, xi'an 710071, china (e mail: lzhen@stu.xidian.edu.cn, hqin@mail.xidian.edu.cn, bsong@mail.xidian.edu.cn).

r. ding is with institute of telecommunication satellite, china academy

of space technology, beijing 100094, china (e mail: greatdn@qq.com).

x. du is with dept. of computer and information sciences, temple

university, philadelphia pa 19122, usa (email: dxj@ieee.org).

m. guizani is with dept. of electrical and computer engineering, univer

sity of idaho, moscow 83844, usa (email: mguizani@gmail.com). 1

that strictly need to cope with the satellite communication peculiarities, such as random access.

as a core technology in the terrestrial mobile communiation system, ra is mainly utilized to establish the uplink communication from the user equipment (ue) to the base staion (bs) . when the bs successfully detects the presence of an access preamble, the unique identity of the preamble will be determined to accurately response to the ue that initiates the ra procedure. furthermore, the round trip delay (rtd) between ue and bs can be also estimated by the preamble detector as the timing advance (ta) information notification to ue . it is clear that the ra preamble plays an important role in the initial uplink access process.

an excellent preamble can be conductive to improving the timing detection performance and access efficiency. to this end, zc sequence with significantly better correlation performance, instead of pseudo noise (pn) sequence used in wideband code division multiple access (wcdma) system, has been also adopted as the ra preamble sequence in lte systems . five kinds of signal format are provided in consideration of different cell radius, and the supportable rtd is bounded by the user at the edge of the cell, e.g. 666.67 us with regard to the largest cell radius (100 km). however, due to the long propagation distance between the satellite and the ue, the rtd can reach to be approximately 540 ms in geostationary earth orbit (geo) satellite systems , which is much longer than that of the terrestrial cell. it means that the existing ra preamble in terrestrial systems is unable to tolerate such long rtds, and needs to be redesigned in a satellite environment.

a reasonable design of the ra preamble for satellite comunications has to consider the characteristics of the satellite environment, such as a long propagation delay, large beam radius, relatively weak multi path effect, large path loss, and high doppler frequency shifts. more specifically, there are some modifications that need to be done. first, the preamble duration must be lengthened on a large scale, such that the long durations of the cyclic prefix (cp) and the guard interval (gt) can effectively eliminate the inter symbol interference (isi) of the adjacent frames, while the long sequence duation will provide a more extensive coverage. next, the long preamble should be easily detected over the line of sight (los) satellite channel with a large carrier frequency offset (cfo) in low received signal to noise ratio (snr) scenarios. thirdly, the preamble detector ought to have a favorable timing detection performance for supporting multi user access, since there are more users that exist in a single beam compared to the terrestrial cell. moreover, by considering the energy limitation of the satellite, a low complexity timing detection method is needed to reduce the energy consumption and implementation cost. consequently, the reliable design and effective detection of the ra preamble is a challenging work for satellite communication systems.

to tackle this challenge, several existing preamble design and detection methods could be exploited for the emerging long term evolution (lte) satellite systems , , which may be considered as a potential starting point for the 5gatellite definition . the most widely used method is to design the preamble based on the general principles in lte . although the preamble can achieve an outstanding correlation performance under an ideal channel due to its long duration and sequence length, we point out it incurs a considerably high complexity for the timing detection process, causing an increase in energy consumption and a reduction in the access efficiency. moreover, a large number of the root zc sequences are used to generate sufficient preambles in support of multi user access, which not only further increases the computational complexity, but degrades the detection performance. as an improvement, the method in proposed to estimate the difference of rtd between the beam center and the user to further reduce durations of cp and gt, and the number of root sequences. unfortunately, the detection complexity of this preamble is still high because the sequence duration must be long enough to ensure the coverage performance requirement. there is also a method in that presented a two step strategy to accomplish timing estimation. the first step is to transmit a long preamble sequence made up of multiple identical terrestrial zc sequences to perform coarse time delay estimation of an access user. secondly, after acquiring feedback from the satellite, the user retransmitted another preamble based on an adjustment of the coarse time delay to determine the accurate time delay. it is obvious that this method not only wastes additional time domain resources, but has a low access efficiency due to the large propagation delay in the satellite environment. several other papers (e.g., ) have studied related wireless and networking issues. in addition, all above methods do not consider the effect of cfo, which can greatly impact the correlation performance of zc sequences. as analyzed in and , the zc sequence is vulnerable to cfo in orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (ofdm) based systems, which causes severe performance degradations for the timing estimation. to mitigate the adverse effects of cfo, peak combining and cyclic shift restriction are utilized for terrestrial lte systems, wherein the cfo is considered to be less than a one subarrier interval, thus this method cannot work effectively when the normalized cfo is larger than one. in , the integer normalized cfo was estimated and used for timing detection by consuming double time domain resources in comparison with the method in lte, but the residual fractional normalized cfo seriously affects the detection accuracy. recently, for the purpose of resisting to large cfo, approaches in and further presented taking advantage of the conjugate symmetric properties of zc sequences to perform timing estimation in the time and frequency domains, respectively. although the timing estimation performance is independent of cfo, both methods obviously have high computational complexities in multi user scenarios by using a large number of root zc sequences. the according to the application requirements for 5g, 5g satellite system is expected to effectively reduce energy consumption without a degradation in performance or an increment in cost, while ensure availability, reliability and robustness . it is obvious that the existing preamble design and detection methods cannot satisfy this target, and conseuently a more appropriate preamble is required to be designed for the 5g satellite. in consequence, this paper focuses on the design of a new ra preamble with the robustness to the satellite environment, low complexity detection and favorable multi user access performance. the main contributions of our paper are summarized as follows.

we design a universal preamble structure by concatenatng a series of short zc sequences insensitive to cfo in the time domain. such that, the preamble sequence can not only deal with the time uncertainty and large coverage range within a beam, but also mitigates the negative influence of cfo in advance with no need to waste additional time/frequency resource or design the corresponding anti cfo timing detection algorithm in the receiver.

based on this preamble structure, we further propose the new design principles for the zc sequences to select the appropriate parameters, such as the sequence length, root index and cyclic shift offset. in terms of detection performance and complexity, the utilization of a single root zc sequence with different cyclic shifts to constitute the long sequence has turned out to be a feasible design proposal, wherein a very small number of root sequences are required to support multi user access and the cyclic shift offsets are independent of the beam radius.

a fast and effective timing detection approach, correponding to the proposed preamble, is also presented from the aspects of the power delay profile (pdp) calulation, peak search and ta estimation. by means of piecewise accumulation of the received long sequence, the pdp calculation can be performed only once to obtain all the correlation peaks in a short detection window, so that both the fractional and integral ta (normalized to the sequence length) can be determined in one step, which significantly reduces the implementation complexities of the transmitter and the receiver.

the rest of the paper is organized as follows. section ii is dedicated to the preamble design in satellite environments, where the general design method is discussed and a new preamble is proposed. in section iii, the system model is briefly described, and a fast and effective timing estimation approach for the new preamble is presented. simulation results and computational complexity analysis are provided in section iv. finally, section v concludes the paper.

ii. preamble design in satellite environments

in general, the ra preamble is composed of cyclic prefix (cp), sequence (seq) and guard interval (gt), and their 2

durations are denoted as tcp , tseq and tgt , respectively. cp is dimensioned to address the time uncertainty of different users in the cell, with the maximum delay spread. for the user at edge of the cell, trt d achieves its maximum value, denoted as trt dmax. accordingly, the cp duration tcp can be obtained as the summation of trt dmax and the maximum delay spread τmax , i.e. tcp = trt dmax +τmax. the effect of gt is to absorb the propagation delay and eliminate the intererence of the adjacent frame. because the influence of channel delay spread can be wiped out by the cp, the gt duration depends only on the maximum rtd, i.e. tgt = trt dmax . in addition, the sequence duration tseq is determined by the design principles including satisfaction of the time uncertainty, sub carrier spacing compatibility, coverage performance and the trade off between the sequence length and the overhead. consequently, the time uncertainty plays an important role in the ra preamble design, the value of which greatly affects the determination of the preamble duration.

as shown in fig. 1, ue1 and ue2 represent the users in a beam with the shortest and longest propagation distances dmin and dmax to the satellite, respectively. note that, if dmin and dmax can be easily derived as the corresponding elevation angles and the height of the satellite is known, the nearest and farthest rtds trt dmin and trt dmax are determined by trt d = 2d/c , where the propagation distance d satisfies dmin ≤ d ≤ dmax, and c is the propagation speed of the electromagnetic wave. when trt dmin is obtained, the user will compensate this time delay before sending the preamble, such that all the users within the same beam are aligned with the nearest user ue1 in the time domain. in other words, for an arbitrary user uei in the beam, its rtd can be expressed as trt di = trt dmin + δtrt di , where δtrt di is the difference of the rtd between uei and ue1. it is clear that the time uncertainty here signifies the difference of rtd δtrt di, instead of trt di in the terrestrial scene. although numerous users are randomly distributed at different locations in a beam, δtrt di can be bounded above by the maximum difference of rtd δtrt dmax, which is given by δtrt dmax = trt dmax − trt dmin = 2(dmax − dmin)/c.

due to the large beam radius and long propagation delay, the value of δtrt dmax in a beam will achieve several milliseconds in the geo satellite system. however, the time uncertainty for terrestrial systems is bounded by trt d of the user at the edge of the cell, for example, trt dmax is only 666.67 us with regard to the largest cell radius 100km in lte system. therefore, it is infeasible to adopt the terres trial preamble to cope with the large beam radius and long propagation delay in satellite scenario, and consequently the longer one needs to be designed to effectively support multiple access. in the following, we first design the ra preamble based on the general principles in , and then propose some new principles in terms of the performance and complexity of preamble detection for satellite communication systems.

a. preamble design based on the general principles

assuming that δtrt dmax is known, the preamble design in the light of the general principles is demonstrated as follows. 1) preamble duration: by considering the fact that the maximum delay spread τmax is far less than δtrt dmax, tcp and tgt can only consider the time uncertainty and are consequently determined as tcp = tgt = δtrt dmax. on the other hand, the sequence duration should be designed not only to deal with the time uncertainty in a beam, but also to guarantee the coverage performance of the system. specifically, tseq can be derived according to the power to thermal noise ratio of the sequence , and simultaneously satisfies tseq ≥ δtrt dmax. in addition, the design of tseq must be strict enough to ensure the sub carrier orthogonality of the ra channel and uplink data channel. thus, tseq is still an integer multiple of the uplink subframe symbol duration tsy m , namely tseq = itsy m , where i is a positive integer. 2) preamble sequence design: due to the better periodical correlation characteristic and lower peak to average power ratio, zc sequence is chosen as the preamble sequence rather than pn sequence here, and its popular form is written as πun(n + 1) nz (cid:2) (cid:3)

where u = 1, 2, · · ·, nz − 1 is the root index, and nz is the length of sequence. given the sequence duration tseq and the preamble bandwidth b, the number of sequence sub carriers in frequency domain is indicated as nc = tseqb. in order to acquire the optimal cross correlation property, the length of sequence nz is further obtained by taking the maximum prime less than nc.

more candidate sequences can be created for multi users by

cyclically shifting root sequences, i.e.

where v = 0, 1, · · · , [nz/ncs] − 1, and [•] represents the rounding operation, while ncs is the cyclic shift offset. note that, ncs is dimensioned as the zero correlation zone (zcz) of the sequence, in which the orthogonality of the preamble sequences can be ensured despite the delay spreads and time uncertainties of different users. that is to say, there will be ony one major peak existing in a detection window with length of ncs , when performing the periodical correlation between a root sequence with its cyclic shifted replica. therefore, lower bound for cyclic shift offset ncs must consider the delay spread and time uncertainty in the beam, and is expressed as ncs ≥ (δtrt dmax + τmax)nz/tseq. based on the general principles,

the ra preamble has been designed as mentioned above. for the satellite scene, 3

(2) the duration of the preamble significantly increases because of the very large value of δtrt dmax in one beam, and consequently, a preamble with greater duration and sequence length is required. it is notable that the preamble sequence can be easily detected during the initial synchronization with a frequency offset up to a half of the sub carrier interval . however, since the sub carrier interval is the reciprocal value of the duration of sequence, it will be observably reduced with respect to the long sequence, which leads to a high sensitivity to cfo for the sequence. on the other hand, the cyclic shift offset dependent on the value of δtrt dmax will be consumedly enlarged due to the long rtd, so that more root zc sequences need to be generated to provide sufficient preambles for multi user access. because each workable root sequence is required to perform correlation with the received signal the excessive utilization of root sequences with long length evidently increases the computational complexity of the preamble detection procedure in the receiver. moreover, the transmission of long sequence will give rise to a larger size of discrete fourier transforms (dft) in the transmitter, which is cumbersome to implement in practice. in conclusion, the preamble designed by the general principles not only is sensitive to large cfos, but achieves a high detection complexity, and thus cannot be adopted as an effective solution in satellite communication systems.

the ra preamble is utilized to identify different users and estimate their respective tas in the base station. for satellite communications, a reasonable design of ra preamble needs to achieve the robustness to satellite environment, low complexity detection and favourable multiser access performance. from this point of view, the ra preamble that is based on the general principles is not an optimal proposal, and needs to be redesigned for satellite environments. to further improve the preamble detection perormance and access efficiency, we propose a novel method for long preamble design in considerations of the robustness to cfo and low complexity preamble detection.

1) robustness to cfo: in satellite communication systems, the cfo is mainly the doppler shift caused by the relative movement between the satellite and ue. the geo satellite moves around the earth at the same speed as the rotation of the earth, thus the doppler shift only rises from the movement of ue; for an leo satellite, once the orbit of the satellite is determined, the doppler shift related to the motion of the satellite can be accurately estimated and compensated for . thus, we consider the cfo to be the doppler shift that resulted entirely from the movement of ue in a satellite environment, and the normalized cfo can be expressed as ε = fd/δf , where fd is the doppler shift, and δf denotes the frequency interval of the sub carrier spacing. according to the analysis in , zc sequence is vulnerable to cfo in ofdm based systems, causing a severe perforance degradation for timing estimation. as aforementioned, methods in , have been proposed to mitigate the adverse effects of cfo. it should be mentioned that all these methods can only cope with cfo in the receiver by designing the corresponding timing estimation algorithms, which results in either additional resource consumption or high computational complexity. nevertheless, the timing detection process will be simplified on condition that the negative effect of cfo can be mitigated in advance. notice that the preamble sequence can be easily detected during the initial synchronization when cfo is smaller than one half of the sub carrier interval. in other words, the sub carrier interval can be carefully designed in terms of the maximum value of cfo within the beam to make the ra preamble detection robust to cfo. in this case, we no longer need to redesign the complex timing detection algorithm immune to cfo or use extra time domain resource in the receiver.

assuming the maximum value of the doppler shift for all users in a beam is known and considering the fact that the cfo in satellite environment is only dependent on the doppler shift of ue, the minimum value of sub carrier interval for a ra channel δframin can be determined as δframin = 2fdmax,where fdmax is denoted as the maximum value of the doppler shift. moreover, the value of tseq must be strictly designed to minimize the frequency domain orthogonality loss of preamble sub carriers and the sub carriers of the surroundng uplink data, which will be achieved when the sub carrier interval of uplink subframe symbol δf is an integer multiple of δfra , i.e δfra = δf /k, where k is a positive integer. therefore, a suitable sub carrier interval, δfra, can be chosen based on fdmax and δf to eliminate the influence of the cfo in the preamble design rather than in the process of timing detection, and tseq is further obtained by taking the reciprocal of δfra. for high speed mobility scenarios, assuming a ue with a speed of 300km/h at a carrier frequency of 2ghz, its doppler shit is about 560hz. thus, the sub carrier interval δfra could be set as 1.25khz, and the corresponding sequence duration tseq is 0.8ms. it is clear that such a short duration of the preamble sequence is far less than δtrt dmax of a beam, and is consequently unable to ensure all the users access to the satellite. therefore, a preamble sequence with a large duration is necessary to guarantee effective access performance for intra beam users.

to further satisfy the duration requirements in the satellite environment, we propose to build a long sequence by concateating a series of short sequences insensitive to cfo in the time domain. to do so, the preamble sequence not only deals with the time uncertainty and large coverage range of a beam, but possesses the capability to mitigate cfo. the structure of the proposed preamble is illustrated in fig. 2, wherein the durations of long and short sequences are denoted as tls and tseq , respectively. it is worth mentioning that tls should be enlarged to be an integer multiple of tseq to maintain the integrity of the short sequence, which indicates the equation tls = ktseq, k ∈ n, always holds.

2) low complexity preamble detection: with the long seuence structure proposed in the above section, we now concentrate on designing the length, root index, and the cyclic shift offset of the short sequence. due to the outstanding characteristics in the preamble detection, zc sequence is still 4

chosen as the short sequence with a length of prime nz, which can be determined according to the general princiles. since k short sequences constitute a long sequence in fig. 2, we need to correspondingly design k zc seuences as well. further, the proposed long sequence can be reformulated as the zc sequences cascade format, i.e. sl = }, where sl denotes the {zc l lth available long sequence, uk and vk are the root index and the cyclic shift of the kth zc sequence, respectively. note that, the short sequence can be viewed as the sub sequence of the long sequence, and consequently the long sequence can be finally obtained as long as the determination of the root index and cyclic shift for each sub sequence. considering the different combinations of uk and vk, there are three design proposals for the long sequence listed as follows: a. utilization of different root zc sequences b. utilization of a single root zc sequence with the same

c. utilization of a single root zc sequence with different

cyclic shifts for proposal a, we utilize k different root zc sequences to build the long sequence, i.e. u0 (cid:5)= u1 (cid:5)= · · · (cid:5)= uk−1. supposing the number of available preamble sequences is l in each beam, there are total k × l root zc sequences that need to be generated for supporting multiple random access. in this case, the long sequence for each user can be uniquely determined by detecting k × l root zc sequences, since each root sequence is required to perform time domain or frequency domain cyclic cross correlations with the received sub sequence. that is to say, the utilization of proposal a for the preamble detection will result in a high computational complexity, which is undesirable in the satellite scene. on the other hand, zc sequences obtained from cyclic shifts of different root sequences are not orthogonal, and orthogonal sequences obtained by cyclically shifting a single root seuence can achieve a better timing detection performance than non orthogonal sequences. therefore, by considering timing detection complexity and performance, it is preferable to use a single root zc sequence as the sub sequence to construct the long sequence, such as proposals b and c.

we consider proposal b first. note that the long sequence consists of k repeated zc sequences here, i.e. u0 = u1 = · · · = uk−1 and v0 = v1 = · · · = vk−1. when this sequence passes through a los channel, it will preserve its periodicity in the time domain, and consequently each detection window still comprises a complete zc sequence, which is obtained from the same cyclic shift of a single root sequence. by considering this important fact, the detection of the long sequence can be implemented by searching the unique root zc sequence in each detection window with a length of nz. that is to say, the length of the periodical correlation is nz instead of k × l for the timing detection, which causes the detection complexity to be obviously reduced by a factor of k in comparison to that of the proposal a. although the computational complexity of the preamble detection for proposal b is reduced to a certain extent, l root zc sequences are still needed in a beam to provide sufficient long sequences for multiple access, leading to the performance degradation of the preamble detection. moreover, from the viewpoint of ta estimation, the long sequence with a repetitive pattern can be only used for estimating the fractional value of ta (normalized to the sub sequence duration) for an access user, but the integral part is unable to be determined because the received sequence is still periodic. as a feasible scheme, the integral value of ta is obtained by detecting the redesigned sequence in , which needs to be retransmitted by ue after the determination of fractional part. it is obvious that this method not only wastes additional time domain resource, but that it also has low access efficiency due to the large propagation delay in the satellite environment.

to further reduce the complexity of preamble detection and improve the access efficiency, we propose the proposal c which takes advantage of one single root sequence with different cyclic shifts to constitute the long sequence, i.e. u0 = u1 = · · · = uk−1 and v0 (cid:5)= v1 (cid:5)= · · · (cid:5)= vk−1. it is clear that if all the cyclic shifts here can be produced by a fixed cyclic shift offset, the long sequence will be composed of the sub sequences obtained from same root zc sequence with a chosen cyclic shift offset. such that, the timing detection for the long preamble only needs to be performed in one shot by combining all sub sequences derived from the same root sequence. therefore, the proposal c has a lower detection complexity in comparison with proposals a and b. since the correlation performance between the orthogonal sequences obained by cyclically shifting a single root sequence is superior to non orthogonal sequences, the long sequence in proposal c is more easily detected than the sequences in other proposals. note that, only when the required number of long sequences cannot be generated by cyclic shifts of a single root sequence, additional zc root sequences should be used. furthermore, as demonstrated in the next section, both the fractional and integral differences of rtd can be obtained by this sequence without extra time domain resource consumption, resulting in the improvement of the access efficiency.

according to the above analysis, the long sequence presentd in proposal c is the optimal design in terms of detection performance and complexity, and can be universally adopted as the ra preamble sequence for the satellite scenario. based on this sequence, we further investigate the corresponding lowomplexity timing detection method in the following section.

iii. fast timing detection method for the long sequence

for achieving initial uplink timing synchronization, the value of ta must be quickly estimated and compensated by detecting the ra preamble sequence to maintain the orthogonality among users within a beam. to this end, we concentrate on the design of the timing detection method by taking advantage of the long sequence presented in proposal 5

c. to be specific, we first describe the system including the satellite channel model and the functional structures of preamble transmitter and receiver, then present a fast and effective timing estimation approach for the long sequence.

on the basis of the sequence in proposal c, the functional structure of the preamble transmitter is designed as follows. k zc sequences with different cyclic shifts are first created by the same root sequence, and then the transmitter deals with these sequences by performing dft with a size of nz , sub carrier mapping and idft with a size of ndf t to acquire k time domain sequences respectively. subsequently, we concatenate k generated short sequences to construct the long preamble sequence. finally, the ra preamble is obtained by adding the cp prior to the long sequence. notice that small scale dfts and idfts are adopted in the generation of the preamble sequence compared with the general model in , which considerably decreases the power consumption and simplifies the design of the system.

as aforementioned, ncs is related to the delay spread and time uncertainty of the cell in the general design requirement. since the delay spread can be supposed to be constant for each user in a cell, ncs only depends on the time uncertainty. this means that the larger the cell, the larger ncs needed to generate orthogonal sequences, and consequently, the more the root zc sequences are needed to provide the l required preamble sequences. different to the general method, ncs is independent on the cell radius and can be flexibly chosen for the different beam coverage in the satellite environment. without loss of generality, we define the cyclic shift of the kth zc sequence in the lth long sequence as vl cs , where k = 0, 1, · · · , k − 1 and l = 1, 2, · · · , l. because the length of the cyclic shift must be less than zc sequence length, n l cs < nz/(k − 1) . in this case, all the cyclic shifts can be produced by the same ncs, which indicates that this setting of ncs not only improves the access performance, but reduces the detection complexity.

when a user attempts to access the network, it will select one of the l available preamble sequences to transmit, and then initiate the ra process. after the transmitted signal the postasses through a typical los satellite channel, processed access signal at the receiver takes the form of

where rl(n) and sl(n) are denoted as the received and transmitted signals for sequence l, respectively. n represents the length of the transmitted signal, and ρl is the channel gain for sequence l. f l and δfra are the cfo for sequence l and the sub carrier spacing of ra channel, respectively. wl(n) is an independent and identically distributed additive white gaussian noise (awgn) sample with zero mean and variance 2σ2 w . let ¯τ l be the time delay difference that arose from the uncertain location of the user (relative to rtd of the nearest user in the beam as the receiver timing reference), it is normalized by the system sampling interval and rounded to an integer directly without considering energy leakage for simplicity in the following analysis , i.e. τ l = [¯τ l/ts] .

then, the ra preamble receiver performs a reversed process of the transmitter. it first removes the cp from the received signal in accordance with the preamble format, and divides the processed sequence into k sub sequences with equal lengths. then, each sub sequence is further handled by the procedures of dft with the length of ndf t , the sub carrier demapping, and idft with the length of nz to obtain the corresponding sequence yk(n) in the time domain, where n = 0, 1, · · · , nz − 1 and k = 0, 1, · · · , k − 1. subsequently, the receiver carries out the timing detection based on the obtained k sub sequences to identify different users and estimate their values of ta. by the utilization of the estimated ta, each user can adjust the transmission time in advance to guarantee the transmitted signals from multi users reaching the satellite at the same time, so that the uplink synchronization among multi users is finally achieved.

b. proposed timing detection method

in this section, we are dedicated to the design of the corresponding timing detection method for the preamble seuence presented in proposal c, from the aspects of the pdp calculation, peak search and ta estimation respectively. in the following, we describe our timing detection approach in detail by making full use of the k divided sub sequences.

1) pdp computation: benefiting from the proposed preamle structure, the receiver can perform the pdp computation by a time/frequency domain periodical correlation in the detection window with length nz . the pdp of the received subequence yk(n) is given by p dpk(m) = |ck(m)|2 nz −1(cid:7) (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:6)

where ck(m), m = 0, 1, · · · , nz − 1 is the discrete timehe time index m domain periodical correlation metric at between the sub sequence yk(n) and the locally generated root zc sequence x(n). while (•)∗ denotes the complex conjugate operation and both sequences are of length nz. it is worth mentioning that by exploiting the properties of the dft, the discrete periodical correlation can be also implemented in the frequency domain to reduce the computational complexity.

by taking into account that the length of the pdp detection window is equal to that of each sub sequence and supposing the sub sequences are sampled at the interval ts = tseq/nz, τ l can be further expressed as τ l = τ l i = knz, k = 0, 1, · · · , k − 1 is denoted as the integral time delay τ l for sequence l , while τ l f is the fractional part for sequence l and can be written as τ l f = τ lmodnz) . it is obvious that the time delay difference, τ l, can be uniquely determined as long as the integral and fractional parts are both obtained. note that, when the fractional time delay is not equal to zero, each received sub sequence is composed of two parts corresponding to the two transmitted zc sequences respectively, as revealed in fig. 3. without loss of generality, i + τ l

we investigate the periodical correlation between the local root zc sequence and the received sub sequence for sequence l in the first detection window, wherein the received subequence yl 0 is considered to be generated by the transmitted zc sequences seqk and seqk+1.

assuming for simplification that noise and cfo are negigible, (without having any effect on the following analysis, we neglect the noise and cfo terms for concentrating on the value of the correlation metric resulting from the zc sequence of the received signal), the sub sequence yl

in fact, if the periodic autocorrelation of a zc sequence proides a single peak at the zero lag, the periodical correlation of the same sequence with its cyclically shifted replica provides a peak at lag m = ml, where ml is the number of samples of the cyclic shift for sequence l. therefore, submitting (5) to (4), we can obtain that the periodical correlation between the sub sequence and the local root zc sequence will produce two peaks at the time indexes ml f − kn l cs)modnz and ml cs)modnz, respectively, and the corresponding pdp values of the two peaks are approximately equal to (τ l

it is evident that, because the received sub sequence does not contain a complete zc sequence, two peaks appear in each pdp detection window, and the difference between their values will be progressively narrowed in the case that τ l f increases from 0 to nz/2. specially, when τ l f = nz/2 , the two peaks are both approximately equal to 1/4 in value, which not only causes the timing estimation nondeterminacy in the noisy channel, but is adverse to the setting of the feasible detection threshold. in addition, the pdp calculation needs to be performed in each detection window so that k times periodical correlations are necessary to detect the preamble sequence, which obviously has a high computational complexity when the designed sequence is long enough.

as a whole, the utilization of the above segmented pdp calculation for preamble detection is inadvisable whether from the detection performance or from the computational complexity. as a matter of fact, the result is caused by the existence of two received zc sequences in one detection window, thus the critical point for performance improvement of preamble detection lies in guaranteeing the completeness of the received zc sequence in the detection window. to this end, we review the received long sequence in fig. 3 and discover that if all the received sub sequences are integrated into one detection window, the all transmitted zc sequences will appear in this window. therefore, a new method is proposed by accumulating k received sub sequences to obtain a new sequence yl(n) , namely yl(n) = yl

and utilize it to circular correlate with the local root zc sequence. it is visible in fig. 3 that yl(n) can be made up of the k complete transmitted zc sequences with different cyclic shifts vl the pdp calculation will be performed only once to obtain k correlation peaks for the timing estimation, and the corresponding time indexes in the detection window are located at k , such that

note that the values of all the peaks are identical and equivlent to 1 in an ideal channel, which makes the detection threshold selection much easier.

2) peak detection: in comparison with a predefined threshld, the larger values of pdp over the detection window can be captured, and their corresponding positions will be passed to the module of the ta estimation. to accurately estimate the value of ta, it is preferred that all the correlation peaks be detected by reasonably setting the detection threshold.

as done in , we derive the detection threshold rth in terms of the required probability of false alarm from the receiver, which is defined as the probability that the pdp exceeds the threshold when no preamble is transmitted. the received sub sequence for sequence l in in this case, i.e. each detection window only contains the noise term, yl k(n) = wl k(n), k = 0, 1, · · ·, k − 1. by accumulating the k received sub sequences within a fixed detection window, the pdp function can be expressed as

where m = 0, 1, · · · , nz − 1. it is clear that the correlation result c l f a(m) obeys a complex gaussian distribution with mean zero and variance 2knzσ2 w.

further, we define the decision variable as λl(m) = p dp l w, and it has thus a central chi square distribution with two degrees of freedom . therefore, the probability of false alarm p l f a(m)/knzσ2

f a is given by

where fχ2(•) denotes the cumulative density function (cdf) for a central chi squared distributed random variable with two degrees of freedom, and λ0 is the false alarm threshold for λl(m). it should be noted from (9) that the false alarm probability as a function of threshold λ0 is independent of the noise variance σ2 w. in the case of multi user access, the overall 7

(9) false alarm probability becomes pf a = 1 − (1 − p l where lu is the number of users in simultaneous access.

the pdp detection threshold rth can finally be determined by rth = λ0knzσ2 w. actually, the expectation of p dp l f a can be derived from (8) as e[p dp l w, where e[•] represents the expectation operation. hence, the detection threshold rth is rewritten as rth = λ0e[p dp l f a]. it is worth noting that e[p dp l f a] can be easily obtained by calculating e[p dp l] corresponding to the noise samples .

3) ta estimation: as aforementioned, we can acquire all the peak locations of multi users based on the designed deection threshold. here, we first investigate how to extract the corresponding peak locations for identifying different users, and then use their values for ta estimation. actually, because the transmitted sub sequences for all the users are generated by the same root zc sequence, the correation peaks for some users may occur at the same locations in the detection widow, making it difficult to distinguish which users they belong to. in the case of two users access, the corresponding time indexes of the correlation peaks are respectively expressed as ml1 f − kn l1 cs)modnz and ml2 f − kn l2 cs)modnz, where k = 0, 1, · · ·, k − 1. considering the situation that their fractional delay difference f = τ l2 τ l1 f = 0 , the coincident peak time indexes will locate at the common multiple of n l1 cs and n l2 cs . note that when the two cyclic shift offsets are co prime and their least common multiple is larger than the length of the detection window nz , there is no more than one time lag at which the two correlation peaks will be in mutual coincidence. in consequence, the design principles of ncs for the proposed preamble sequence are concluded as follows.

the set of correlation peak location for sequence l can be denoted as bl = {τ l f − n l f −(k −1)n l cs)modnz}. it is observed that the time interval of every two adjacent correlation peak locations is n l cs in the detection window, and the fractional delay difference corresponds to the first element in the set bl . therefore, we can utilize these characteristics to determine the cyclic shift offset and estimate the fractional delay offset of each access user. let b denote the set of all the peak locations above the detection threshold, we circularly search k peak locations with interval n l cs from the first element of b to the end. suppose that a group of eligible peak locations in bl exists, the identity of access user is determined by the exclusive cyclic shift offset n l cs , and the fractional delay difference τ l f is obtained as the value of first element in bl . such that, we need to search l times in total to determine all the cyclic shift offsets for access users and their respective fractional delay differences.

next, we focus on the determination of the integral time delay for each user. note that, after compensating the fracional delay difference by circularly shifting the received long 8

fig. 4. the basic procedures for the proposed timing detection.

sequence τ l f samples left, each adjusted sub sequence, denoted as ¯yl k, will only contain a integrally transmitted zc sequence. since zc sequences generated from the different cyclic shifts of the same root sequence are orthogonal, the integral time delay τ l i for sequence l can be obtained by performing the cross correlation operations only k times between ¯yl k and its specific transmitted sequence, e.g. the root zc sequence with a cyclic shift n l

cs , and is expressed by

where c l(knz) = 1 n=0 ¯yl cs) nz is the cross correlation functions at the time lag knz, k = 0, 1, · · ·, k − 1. that is to say, τ l i is determined by searching for the location of xu(n+n l cs) after fractional ta adjustment of the received long sequence. k(n + knz)x∗ u(n + n l

when the integral and fractional parts are both determined, the delay difference for sequence l can be acquired as τ l = τ l i + τ l f . as a result, the corresponding timing advance is finally obtained as τ l/ts , where ts is the sampling interval. the more detailed flow chart of the proposed timing detection method is demonstrated in fig. 4.

iv. performance evaluations and discussions

in order to demonstrate the superiority of our method, we first design the ra preamble based on the proposed design principles for a typical satellite communication system, then make comparisons of its performance in terms of preamble detection and ta estimation with the existing approaches by computer simulations. finally, the computational complexity of the proposed method is also assessed.

a. preamble design

without loss of generality, we consider the geo multieam satellite communication system, in which a large number of spot beams can be taken shape by using beam forming technology in the focused areas . here, we choose one of the representative beam coverage patterns in china that has 109 spot beams with radius of 200 km. the system parameters are listed in table i as follows.

by utilization of the above parameters, the maximum dfferential propagation delay is derived as 0.96 ms, and the cp duration is thus given by tcp = 1.92 ms. according to the requirements of coverage performance and the time uncertainty within the beam, the duration of the long sequence tls needs to be no less than 6.37 ms . because the geo satellite can be seen as stationary to the earth, the cfo can be represented as the doppler frequency shift only caused by the movement of the ue, and its maximum value is derived to be 481 hz in the beam, and consequently the sub carrier interval δfra of ra channel should be larger than 962 hz. to make fair comparisons to the existing access preambles and consider the compatibility with the terrestrial lte system, we set sub carrier interval δfra to be 1.25 khz, and thus the corresponding duration of the sub sequence tseq is 0.8 ms. for maintaining the completeness of the sub sequence, tls should be enlarged to be k times of tseq , here we set k = 8 and consequently tls is 6.4 ms. in order to guarantee multi user access in lte, 64 long preamble sequences are required to be designed by exploiting different combinations of root indexes and cyclic shift offsets. based on the design constraints in the previous section, we can choose some adequate cyclic shift offsets to support multi user access from the set bcs = {29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 47, 53, 59, 61, 67, 71, 73, 79, 83, 89, 97, 101, 103, 107, 109, 113, 127}. note that there are 22 satisfactory cyclic shift offsets in bcs, hence the corresponding number of root zc sequence is k = 3. for each sub sequence in the long sequence, it can be generated from one of the three root zc sequences in time domain with a length of nz = 839 , here the root index can be flexibly chosen from 1 to 839.

the performance requirements for lte ra in different channel conditions are demonstrated in 3gpp protocol, wheren the false alarm probability must be less than or equal to 0.1% , and the corresponding probability of detection for a single received antenna shall be equal to or exceed 99% in snr= 11db over a static propagation awgn channel . by adopting the proposed timing detection method, we begin 100

fig. 5. the missed detection probabilities of the proposed preamble versus snr in multi user scenarios.

with the derivation of the false alarm probability to determine the threshold, and then utilize the missed detection probability to judge whether the detection performance of the proposed method can meet the performance requirements.

according to the proposed peak detection method, the false alarm probability is independent of the noise variance and only determined by the detection threshold. in order to meet the requirement that the false alarm probability is lower than 10−3, when the numbers of the multiple access users are l = 1, 4, 16, 32, 64 respectively, the corresponding detection thresholds can thus be set as 29, 31.7, 34.4, 35.8 and 37.2 under arbitrary values of snr. based on the above thresholds, we describe the relationship between the missed detection probability and different values of the received snr over the awgn channel in fig. 5. note that the missed detection probability is gradually reduced as the snr increases. when snr= 11db, all the missed detection probabilities for different multi users scenarios are lower than 10−2. that is to say, the proposed sequence satisfies both the performance requirements for timing detection and consequently can be adopted as the ra preamble in lte satellite communication systems.

b. performance of preamble detection

the success rate of first access is a criterion of crucial importance for evaluating the efficiency of access in the satellite communication system . a higher success rate can indicate a better detection performance and lower access delay. to show the superior detection performance of our method, we compare the success rates of first access for different methods as shown in table ii. note that, the preambles for different methods are designed according to the system parameters in table i, and the methods in and are corresponding to the proposals a and b, respectively.

by considering the characteristics of the proposed preamble, as shown in fig. 6, the performance comparisons are emhatically performed in three respects from the relationships between the success rate of first access with cfo, the number of access users, and the received snr, respectively. for the influence of preamble collision simplicity, we neglect among multiple competing users on the success access rate, and focus on the detection performance of different preambles. 9

fig. 6(a) depicts the success rate of first access of the proosed method compared to those of the previously presented methods for different values of the cfo. here, the number of the access user is 1 and the received snr is set as 14 db for each method. it is obvious that the success rate for the general method will significantly decrease when the cfo is larger than half of its sub carrier spacing. likewise, the method in also suffers from large cfos due to its small sub carrier interval. therefore, the above two methods do not have the robustness to large cfos and are only valid in supporting the random access for the users in low speed mobility scenarios. on the contrary, the success rates for the other four methods are scarcely affected by the cfo because of the larger subarrier intervals compared to the above two methods, whereas the terrestrial lte sequence performs poorly by reason of having the short lengths of cp and sequence. note that the access performance of the proposed method is slightly better than that of and , but with a considerably lower computational complexity.

in the following, we investigate detection performance of our method along with the cfo insensitive methods in multiser scenarios. fig. 6(b) shows the relationship between the success rates with the number of access users. the snr is also set as the same value in fig. 7, i.e. 14 db. since the crossorrelation performance of the orthogonal sequences obtained by cyclically shifting a single root sequence is superior to that of the non orthogonal sequences, the more root sequences that are used for generating the required number of sequences, the worse performance the preamble detection will obtain. in consonance with this fact, the proposed method achieves a remarkably higher success rate of the first access as compared to the conventional methods, especially under the condition that more users request access at the same time. in fig. 6(c), we further compare success access rate of the four methods with respect to different values of snr in case of l = 16. it is observed that the proposed method is capable of commendably completing the multi user access when snr is larger than 12 db. moreover, our method also obtains a better access performance than the existing methods at low snrs.

the performance improvement for the proposed detection method in fig. 6 is fundamentally dependent on the reasonable design of ra preamble. on the one hand, the sufficient sub carrier interval effectively reduces the preamble sensitivity to cfo due to the relative movement between the satellite and ue. on the other hand, the minimum utilization of root zc sequence restrains interser interference to the full extent, and consequently enhances the noise mitigation capability in multi user scenarios as well. 1.92 ms 6.4 ms 1.25 khz 839×8 [0, 838] 64×8 proposed method 1.92 ms 6.4 ms 1.25 khz 839×8 bcs 3

fig. 7. timing mse performance comparisons in (a) the awgn channel and (b) a rician channel (k = 10)

c. performance of ta estimation

in fig. 7, we present the timing performance comparisons of the proposed ta estimation method with other related methods in terms of mean squared error (mse) over different channels. here, the number of the access users is 16 and the cfo for each user is selected from [0, 480] hz in turn with the same interval. it is visible in fig. 7(a) that both the general method and have large estimation variances because of their high sensitivities to large cfo. for the other four methods, as the snr increases, the number of the access users becomes the dominant influence factor for ta estimation. consequently, the proposed method has an obviously higher timing accuracy compared to the traditional methods in awgn channel.

knowing the fact that the rician channel is closer to the real satellite channel compared with the awgn channel , we further compare the timing estimation performance of different methods over a typical rician channel in , where the rician factor k = 10. although there is an approximate 2 db performance degradation when mse is equal to 10−2, the proposed ta estimator outperforms the existing methods again, as exhibited in fig. 7(b).

d. computational complexity

the complexity of proposed method, in terms of correlation length and times, is mainly incurred by the correlation function of pdp calculation in (4). according to the number of cyclic shift offsets in bcs, there are only three the root zc sequences that must be correlated with the accumulated sub sequence in one detection window. hence, to detect all the received long sequence, we total need to perform the periodical correlation with a length of nz in three times. in table iii, we evaluate the computational complexities of proposed method as well as other related methods, which indicates that the proposed method achieves a significantly lower complexity than those it can effectively reduce of the related methods, so that 10

fig. 6. the success rates of the first access for different methods versus (a) the cfo, (b) the number of access users, and (c) the snr.

table iii computational complexity comparisons for different methods

the computational burden and power dissipation in satellite communication systems.

this paper addresses the issue of ra preamble design and detection in mobile satellite communication systems. according to the features of the satellite environment, a novel preamble design method has been presented based on a universal preamble structure and the new principles of parameter selection. by using the proposed preamble, a fast and effective timing detection approach has also been investigated from the aspects of pdp calculation, peak search and ta estimation. simulation results have verified the feaibility of designed preamble, and demonstrated that the proosed method achieves significant performance improvement in terms of success access rate and timing mse in a typical satellite communication environment. moreover, the compuational complexity comparison indicates that the proposed method provides a considerably lower complexity compared with other related methods. further, the proposed method is not only suitable for the current lte satellite systems, but can also be adopted as a candidate for emerging 5g satellite communications. (cid:12)