longfei yin , graduate student member, ieee, and bruno clerckx , senior member, ieee

abstract— this work focuses on the promising rate splitting multiple access (rsma) and its beamforming design problem to achieve max min fairness (mmf) among multiple co channel multicast groups with imperfect channel state information at the transmitter (csit). contrary to the conventional linear precodng (nors) that relies on fully treating any residual interference as noise, we consider a novel multigroup multicast beamforming strategy based on rsma. rsma relies on linearly precoded rate splitting (rs) at the transmitter and successive interference cancellation (sic) at the receivers, and has recently been shown to enable a flexible framework for non orthogonal transmission and robust interference management in multi antenna wireless networks. in this work, we characterize the mmf degreesf freedom (dof) achieved by rs and nors in multigroup multicast with imperfect csit and demonstrate the benefits of rs strategies for both underloaded and overloaded scenarios. motivated by the dof analysis, we then formulate a generic transmit power constrained optimization problem to achieve mmf rate performance. the superiority of rs based multigroup multicast beamforming compared with nors is demonstrated via simulations in both terrestrial and multibeam satellite systems. in particular, due to the characteristics and challenges of multibeam satellite communications, our proposed rs strategy is shown promising to manage its inter beam interference.

(rsma), multi antenna communications, multigroup multicast, multibeam satellite communications.

w ith the proliferation of mobile data and multimedia

traffic, demands for massive connectivity and contententric services are continuously rising. examples include audio/video streaming, advertisements, large scale system updates, localized services and downloads, etc. spurred by such requirements, wireless multicasting has attracted a widepread research attention. it is a promising solution to deliver the same message to a group of recipients. in a more general scenario, which is known as multigroup multicasting, distinct

manuscript received july 30, 2020; revised october 6, 2020; accepted november 3, 2020. date of publication november 16, 2020; date of current version february 17, 2021. this work has been partially supported by the u.k. engineering and physical sciences research council (epsrc) under grant ep/r511547/1. this article was presented in part at the 2020 ieee international conference on communications workshops (icc workshops). the associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was y. wu. (corresponding author: longfei yin.)

the authors are with the communications and signal processing group, imperial college longfei.yin17@imperial.ac.uk;

department of electrical and electronic engineering, london, london sw7 2az, u.k. (e mail: b.clerckx@imperial.ac.uk).

color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at

digital object identifier 10.1109/tcomm.2020.3037596 contents are simultaneously transmitted to multiple co channel multicast groups. since the available spectrum is aggressively reused towards spectrum efficient and high throughput wireless communications, interference mitigation techniques are of particular importance.

a. related works

multicast beamforming is firstly considered in with single group setup. then, the problem is extended to multiroup multicasting in where the beamforming design is investigated in two optimization perspectives, namely the qos constrained total transmit power minimization (qos problem) and the power constrained max min fairness (mmf problem). both formulations are shown to be np hard, containing the multiuser unicast and the single group multicast as extreme cases. the combination of semi definite relaxation (sdr) and gaussian randomization, together with bisection search algorithm are elaborated to generate feasible approximate solutions. alternatively, a convex concave procedure (ccp) algorithm is demonstrated to provide better performance. however, its complexity increases dramatically as the problem size grows. in , a low complexity algorithm for multigroup multicast beamforming design based on alternating direction method of multipliers (admm) together with ccp is proposed for large scale wireless systems. moreover, the multigroup multicast beamforming is extended to many other scenarios, including the per antenna power constraint addressed in , cloud rans with wireless backhaul , coordinated beamorming in multi cell networks , cache aided networks and massive mimo .

one practical application of multigroup multicast is found in multibeam satellite communication systems. in recent years, the multibeam satellite system has received considerable research attentions due to its ubiquitous coverage, and full frequency reuse across multiple narrow spot beams towards high throughput. based on state of the art technologies in the satellite serves dvb s2x , each spot beam of more than one user simultaneously by transmitting a single coded frame. since different beams illuminate different group of users , this promising satcom system follows the aforementioned physical layer (phy) multigroup multicast transmission. in the literature of multibeam satellites, a generic iterative algorithm is proposed in to design the precoding and power allocation alternatively in a time division multilexed (tdm) scheme considering single user per beam. then, multigroup multicast is considered. proposes a frameased precoding problem for multibeam multicast satellites. optimization of system sum rate is considered under individal power constraints via an alternating projection technique with a semidefinite relaxation (sdr) procedure, which is adequate for small to medium coverage areas. in , a twotage low complex precoding design for multibeam multiast satellite systems is proposed. the first stage minimizes the inter beam interference, while the second stage enhances intra beam sinr. studies the sum rate maximization problem in multigateway multibeam satellite systems conidering feeder link interference. leakage based mmse and sca admm algorithm are used to compute precoding vectors locally with limited coordination.

is noted that all aforementioned works rely on the conventional multigroup multicast linear precoding. each user decodes its desired stream while treating all the other interference streams as noise. the advantage of this conentional scheme lies in exploiting the spatial degrees of freedom provided by multiple antennas using low complexity transmitter receiver architecture. however, its effectiveness severely depends on the network load and the quality of channel state information at the transmitter (csit). as preoders are designed based on the channel knowledge, csit inaccuracy can result in an inter group interference problem which is detrimental to the system performance. another limitation is that the conventional linear precoding is able to eliminate inter group interference only when the number of transmit antennas is sufficient. otherwise, it fails to do so in overloaded systems . for example, rate saturation occurs in overloaded systems.

in this work, we depart from this conventional scheme (denoted as nors in the sequel) and introduce the powerful rate splitting multiple access (rsma) to the multigroup multicast setup. rsma relies on one layer or the multiple layer linearly precoded rate splitting (rs) at transmitter and successive interference cancellation (sic) at the receivers , . it contains nors and non orthogonal multiple access (noma) as a special case , . the key of rs based multigroup multicast beamforming is to divide each group intended message into a common part and a private part. the common parts are jointly encoded into a common stream, while the private parts are separately encoded into private streams. at receiver sides, the common stream is firstly decoded by all the users and then removed through sic. next, each user decodes its desired private stream and treats the remaining interference as noise. this characteristic enables rs to partially decode the interference and partially treat the interference as noise . the benefits of rs have been investigated in a wide range of multi antenna setups, namely multiuser unicast transmission with perfect csit , imperfect csit , multigroup mulicast transmission , , as well as superimposed unicast and multicast transmission , etc. according to the analysis and simulations, shows that rs is more robust to the influencing factors such as channel disparity, channel orthogonality, network load, and quality of csit. for imperfect csit, the sum degrees of freedom (dof) and mmf dof of underloaded mu miso system are studied in and . compared with nors, rs is demonstrated to further exploit spatial dimensions. of particular interest to this work is , the employment of rs in multigroup multicast beamforming was first proposed. an mmf problem based on rs is formulated and solved by the weighted minimum mean square error (wmmse) approach . the superiority of rs under perfect csit is shown in overloaded multigroup multicast systems.

in this work, motivated by further exploring the benefits of rs for multigroup multicast beamforming, we consider both underloaded and overloaded regimes with imperfect csit. furthermore, its application to multibeam satellite systems is investigated. the main contributions are as follows:

first, this paper is a follow up and extension of , which studied rs for multigroup multicast under perfect csit and overloaded systems. this is the first paper to study rs for multigroup multicast in the more general and practical scenario of imperfect csit in both underloaded and overloaded systems.

second, the mmf dof of rs and nors in multigroup multicast with imperfect csit is characterized. the mmf dof, also known as max min fair multiplexing gain, corresponds to the maximum multiplexing gain that can be simultaneously achieved by all multicast groups. it reflects the pre log factor of mmf rate at high snr. this is the first work on dof analysis for multigroup multicast in the presence of imperfect csit. in , mmf dof gains of rs with perfect csit were only observed in overloaded systems. in this work with imperfect csit setting, rs is shown to provide mmfof gains in both underloaded and overloaded systems. interference and group partitioning through residual analysis, rs is a shown to be more flexible than nors to overcome the residual interference caused by imperfect csit. by adjusting the common stream and private streams, we can determine how much interference to be decoded and how much to be treated as noise. due to the existence of common part, rs provides extra gains and avoids the saturating performance at high snr.

third, motivated by the benefits of rs over nors from a dof perspective, a mmf beamforming optimization problem is then formulated to see whether the dof gain translates into rate gain. to this end, the design of rs for mmf rate maximization at finite snr is further investigated. this is the first work on the optimization of rs based multigroup multicast with imperfect csit. solving the mmf problem with imperfect csi via saa and wmmse is for the first time studied. optimum mmf ergodic rate can be obtained by optimizing the defined short term mmf average rate (ar) over a long sequence of channel estimates. the formulated problem is general enough to cope with flexible power constraints, namely a total power constraint (tpc) and per antenna power constraints (pac). through simulation results, the dof benefits of rs over nors translate into rate benefits at finite snr and rs is shown to outperform nors in a wide range of setups. all the simulation results are inline with the derived theoretical mmf dofs results. considering imperfect csit, we show that rs for multigroup multicast brings spectral efficiency gains over nors in both underloaded and overloaded scenarios. this contrasts with the perfect csit setting of , where rs was shown to provide significant spectral efficiency benefits in the overloaded scenarios only.

the proposed rs framework is applied to a multibeam satellite setup and results confirm the signifiant performance gains over traditional techniques. since multibeam satellite communication systems aim to operte with full frequency reuse to enable higher throughput, interference management techniques should be employed. based on state of the art technologies in dvb s2x, each spot beam of the satellite serves more than one user simultaneously by transmitting a single coded frame. so, this multibeam multicasting follows the physical layer (phy) of a multigroup multicast transmission. different from , which studies rs in a two beam satellite sysem adopting tdm scheme in each beam, and which focuses on the sum rate optimization and low complexity rs precoding design with perfect csit, we consider a novel rs based multibeam multicast beamforming in this paper and formulate a per feed power constrained mmf problem with different csit qualities. rs framework is shown very promising for multibeam satellite systems to manage its inter beam interference, taking into account practical challenges such as csit uncertainty, per feed constraints, hot spots, uneven user distribution per beam, and overloaded regimes. simulation results confirm the significant performance gains over traditional techniques.

the rest of this paper is organized as follows. the system model, csit assumptions and rs for multigroup multicast are introduced in section ii. section iii investigates the mmf dof of both nors and rs. section iv provides details of the problem formulation. a modified wmmse approach is designed to optimize the mmf rs based multigroup multicast beamforming. applications to both terrestrial and multibeam satellite systems are given in section v via simulations. finally, section vi concludes this work.

notations: in the remainder of this paper, boldface upperase, boldface lowercase and standard letters denote matrices, column vectors, and scalars respectively. r and c denote the real and complex domains. the real part of a complex number x is given by r (x). e (·) is the expectation of a random variable. the operators (·)t and (·)h denote the transpose and the hermitian transpose. |·| and (cid:2)·(cid:2) denote the absolute value and euclidean norm respectively.

we consider a multigroup multicasting downlink miso sysem. the transmitter is equipped with nt antennas, serving k single antenna users which are grouped into m (1 ≤ m ≤ k) multicast groups. the users within each group desire the same multicast message. the messages are independent amongst different groups. let gm denote the set of users belonging to the m th group, for all m ∈ m = {1 · · · m }. the size of group m is gm = |gm|. we assume that each user belongs to only one group, thus gi ∩ gj = ∅, for all i, j ∈ m, i (cid:7)= j. let k = {1 · · · k} denote the set of all users, i.e. ∪m∈m gm = k. in this model, the signal received at user x + nk, ∀k ∈ k, where x ∈ cnt×1 k writes as yk = hh is the transmitted signal, hk ∈ cnt×1 is a channel vector between the transmitter and the k th user. h (cid:2) [h1, · · · , hk] is the composite channel. nk ∼ cn represents the additive white gaussian noise (awgn) at user k, which is independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) across users with zero mean and variance σ2 n,k. without loss of generality, unit noise variances are assumed, i.e. σ2 (cid:2) 0, σ2 (cid:3)

a. transmission schemes

the rs strategy for multigroup multicasting is described as follows. there are overall m messages w1, · · · , wm intended to users in g1, g2, · · · , gm respectively. each mesage is split1 into a common part and a private part, i.e. wm → {wm,c, wm,p}. all the common parts are packed together and encoded into a common stream shared by all groups, i.e. {w1,c · · · wm,c} → sc, while the private parts are encoded into private streams for each group independently, i.e. wm,p → sm. as a consequence, the vector of symbol streams to be transmitted is s = [sc, s1, · · · , sm ]t ∈ c(m+1)×1, (cid:4) where e = i. data streams are then mapped to transmit antennas through a linear precoding matrix p = [pc, p1, · · · pm ] ∈ cnt×(m+1). this yields a transmit signal x ∈ cnt×1 given by (cid:5)

where pc ∈ cnt×1 is the common precoder, and pm ∈ cnt×1 is the m th group's precoder. moreover, flexible transmit power constraints are considered in this work, including a total power constraint and per antenna power constraints. since the average power of transmit symbols are normalized to be one, the expression of a general transmit power constraint writes as

where pl is the l th power limit, and dl is a diagonal shapng matrix changing among different demands. in particular, when the focus is on a total transmit power constraint, let l = 1, dl = i and pl = p > 0, from which p equals to the transmit snr. however, in some practical implementations, using individual amplifiers per antenna causes the lack of flexbility in sharing energy resources. such a scenario is typically

1the readers are referred to , for a general introduction

to multi antenna rate splitting. (1)

(2) found in multibeam satellite communications because flexible on board payloads are costly and complex to implement. perntenna available power constraints are taken into account by setting l = nt, and pl = p/nt. the matrix dl becomes a zero matrix except its l th diagonal element equaling to 1.

then, we define μ : k → m as mapping a user to its corresponding group. the signal received at user k can be expanded as

where μ (k) is the group index of user k. each user firstly decodes the common stream sc and treats m private streams as noise. the sinr of decoding sc at user k is

as rc,k = its log2 (1 + γc,k). to guarantee that each user is capable of decoding sc, we define a common rate rc at which sc is communicated

note that sc is shared among groups such that rc (cid:2) (cid:8) m m=1 cm, where cm corresponds to group m's portion of common rate. after the common stream sc is decoded and removed through successive interference cancellation (sic), each user then decodes its desired private stream by treating all the other interference streams as noise. the sinr of decoding sμ(k) at user k is given by (cid:7) (cid:7)hh

its corresponding achievable rate is rk = log2 (1 + γk). in terms of group m, the multicast information sm should be decoded by all users in gm. thus, the shared information rate rm is determined by the weakest user in gm and defined as

the m th group rate is composed of cm and rm, and writes as

in addition, the conventional linear precoding (nors) for multigroup multicasting is revisited. unlike rs, information intended to each group is encoded directly to a single stream, i.e. wm → sm, ∀m ∈ {1 · · · m }, rather than splitting into a common part and private part. the symbol vector to be trans (cid:5) mitted is s = [s1, · · · , sm ]t ∈ cm×1, where e . at user sides, each user decodes its desired stream and treats the interference streams as noise. following the same all g,m = rm (cid:2) min rn ors i∈gm ri.

through the description above, we can observe that rs is a more general scheme2 which encompasses nors as a special case. rs boils down to nors by discarding its common stream and allocating all the transmit power to its private streams.

remark 1: the encoding complexity and receiver complexity of rs are slightly higher than nors. for the one layer rs in a m group multigoup multicast miso bc, m + 1 streams need to be encoded in contrast to m streams for nors. one layer rs requires one sic at each user sides while nors does not require any sic.

b. csit uncertainty and scaling

imperfect csit is considered in this work while the channel state information at each receiver (csir) is assumed to be perfect. to model csit uncertainty, channel matrix h is (cid:11) (cid:9)h1, · · · , (cid:9)hk denoted as the sum of a channel estimate (cid:9)h (cid:2) and a csit error (cid:12)h (cid:2) , i.e. h = (cid:9)h + (cid:12)h. csit uncertainty can be characterized by a conditional density fh| . taking each channel vector separately, (cid:4)(cid:13) (cid:13)(cid:12)hk the csit error variance σ2 is allowed to decay as o (p −αk ) , , , , where αk ∈ [0, ∞) is the scaling factor which quantifies csit quality of the k th user. equal scaling factors among users are assumed for simplicity in this model, i.e. αk = α. for a finite non zero α, csit uncertainty decays as p grows, (e.g. by increasing the number of feedback bits). in extreme cases, α = 0 corresponds to a non scaling csit, (e.g. with a fixed number of feedback bits). α → ∞ represents perfect csit, (e.g. with infinite number of feedback bits). the scaling factor is truncated such that α ∈ [0, 1] in this context since α = 1 corresponds to perfect csit in the dof sense , . (cid:10)

iii. max min fair dof analysis

to characterize the performance of rs and nors for maxin fair (mmf) multigroup multicasting with imperfect csit, mmf dof of both schemes are investigated. the mmf dof, also called mmf multiplexing gain or symmetric multiplexing gain, corresponds to the maximum multiplexing gain that can be simultaneously achieved across multicast groups. it reflects the pre log factor of mmf rate at high snr. the larger mmf dof is, the faster mmf rate increases with snr. one would therefore like to use communication schemes with the largest possible dof. motivated by mitigating interference at receivers, the beamforming used in this section is sufficient from the dof perspective since dof can be roughly interpreted as the number of interference free streams simultaneously communicated in a single channel use , .

2rs is also a more general framework that encompass noma as a special case , , , . since noma leads to a waste of spatial resources and multiplexing gain/ dof (and therefore rate loss) in multi antenna settings the additional expense of large receiver complexity, as demonstrated at extensively in , , we do not compare with noma in this work. (9)

we start from nors, and define the k th user dof as rk(p ) dk (cid:2) limp →∞ log2(p ) . the m th group dof is given by rn ors g,m (p ) log2(p ) = mini∈gm di, and dn ors (cid:2) dn ors m minm∈m dn ors is achieved by all groups. for a given beamforming p = [p1, · · · pm ] ∈ cnt×m , dn ors represents the mmf dof. it interprets the maximum fraction of an interference free stream that can be simultaneously communiated amongst groups. since each user is equipped with only one antenna, we have

proposition 1: the optimum mmf dof achieved by nors

the achievability of proposition 1 is discussed as follows by providing at least one feasible beamforming that achieves the dof in (11). next, results in (11) are derived as tight upper bounds from the converse, which completes the proof of proposition 1.

1) achievability of proposition 1: to mitigate inter group interference observed by each user, we aim to design the precoders such that (cid:9)hh k pm = 0, ∀ m ∈ m, k ∈ k \ gm. define (cid:9)hm as the composite channel estimate of (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:9)hh , where (cid:9)hm (cid:2) users in group m, we have pm ∈ null (cid:10) (cid:9)h1, · · · (cid:9)hm−1, (cid:9)hm+1 · · · , (cid:9)hm ∈ cnt×(k−gm) is a chanel estimate matrix excluding (cid:9)hm. all the channel vectors are (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:9)hh ≥ 1, assumed to be independent. to satisfy dim null a minimum number of transmit antennas is required, as follows (12) ensures sufficient nt to place pm in the null space of its unintended groups. primary inter group interference caused by the m th precoder can be eliminated. without loss of generality, group sizes are assumed in an ascending order: g1 ≤ g2 ≤ · · · ≤ gm . in an underloaded scenario, condition (12) has to hold for all m ∈ m, and we rewrite it as

when (13) is satisfied, the system is underloaded. considerng equal power allocation such that (cid:2)p1(cid:2)2 = · · · = (cid:2)pm (cid:2)2 = p m , user k received signal and the scaling of different received signal components are expressed by

the second term is named as residual interference caused by imperfect csit. all the primary inter group interference (cid:9)hh m j=1,j(cid:3)=μ(k) pjsj has been eliminated. since the channel (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13)(cid:9)hk (cid:13)2 (cid:13)2 (cid:13)hk = o (1). , state does not depend on p , we have (cid:3) (cid:2) p 1−α the residual interference term scales as o , with csit error variance decaying as o (p −α). note that when α = 1, the residual interference is reduced to the noise level, and it corresponds to perfect csit from the dof sense. with α ∈ [0, 1], γk scales as o (p α), from which dk = α at each user. for all m ∈ m, dn ors = α, and hence the mmf dof dn ors = α. m

the system becomes overoaded. if reducing the spatial dimensions to nt < k − gm + 1, the inter group interference caused by each precoder cannot be eliminated. such scenario is identified as fully overloaded , and its mmf dof collapses to 0. next, we focus on the partially overloaded in which k − gm + 1 ≤ nt < k − g1 + 1. we generally assume nt = k −gx +1, where the group index x ∈ (1, m ]. following the logic of (12), primary inter group interference caused by the [x, m ] th group can be nulled if (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:9)hh , ∀ m ∈ the precoders are designed such that pm ∈ null [x, m ]. in addition, since nt = k − gx + 1 > (k − gx) − g1 + 1, the system excluding group x can be regarded as (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:9)hh underloaded. thus, we design pm ∈ null , ∀ m ∈ m \ x to remove inter group interference among m \ x. the beamforming directions described above can be concluded as (cid:3) , ∀ m ∈ [1, x) it is evident that

an example of the power allocation is

it is observed that gx bear both residual interference and interference from groups [1, x), while k \ gx see only residual (cid:3) (cid:2) p β+α−1 interference. γk at user k ∈ k \ gx scales as o , (cid:3) (cid:2) p 1−β k ∈ gx scales as o and γk at user . achieving max min fair dof requires the same dof amongst groups. (cid:2) (cid:3) p α by setting β = 1 − α . 2 for all m ∈ m, and the = α it turns out that dn ors mmf dof dn ors = α is achieved. multiplexing gains 2 2 , all users' sinrs scale as o

2 are partially achieved. importantly, such partially overloaded scenario does not exist when the group sizes are equal.

2) converse of proposition 1: proposition 1 is further shown as a tight upper bound for any feasible nors beamorming. here, we generally assume the power allocation (cid:2)p1(cid:2)2 , · · · , (cid:2)pm (cid:2)2 scale as o (p a1) , · · · , o (p am ), where a1, · · · , am ∈ [0, 1] are power partition factors. for each m ∈ m, im ⊂ m is defined as a group set with precoding vectors interfering with the m th group, while rm ⊂ m is defined as a group set with precoding vectors that only cause residual interference to the m th group. we define am (cid:2) maxj∈im aj, and am (cid:2) maxj∈rm aj. note that am = 0 for im = , and am = 0 for rm = . for each m ∈ m, there exists at least one user k ∈ gm with sinr scaling as o , since the received signal can be generally written as dn ors m1

according to the definition, we obtain an upper bound for the achievable group dof

where (·)+ ensures dof non negativity. the achievable mmfof of nors satisfies dn ors ≤ dn ors for all m ∈ m. next, we aim to derive its tight upper bound d∗n ors such that dn ors ≤ d∗n ors for any feasible nors beamforming in different network load scenarios.

when the system is underloaded, it is obvious that im = and rm = m \ m for all m ∈ m. accordingly, we have am = 0 and am = maxj∈m\m aj. (19) can be rewritten as

from (20), we assume am − maxj∈m\m aj + α > 0 because am − maxj∈m\m aj + α ≤ 0 limits d∗n ors to 0. then, (·)+ can be omitted. since dn ors is upper bounded by taking the average of any two group dofs, we have

(23) follows from the fact that point wise minimum is upperounded by any element in the set. (24) is obtained due to a1 ≤ maxj∈m\2 aj and a2 ≤ maxj∈m\1 aj.

(29) is obtained because point wise minimum is upperounded by any element in the set. (30) is obtained due to am1 − maxj∈m\1 aj ≤ 0.

in a fully overloaded scenario, it is sufficient to show that dn ors is upper bounded by 0 for nt = k − gm , as further decreasing nt does not increase dof. in this case, we have nt < k−gm+1 for all m ∈ m. each pm causes interference to at least one group. here, we assume am2 = maxm∈m am. the index of group seeing interference from pm2 is denoted by m3. thus, dn ors is upper bounded by

combining the upper bounds and achievability derived above, proposition 1 is proved. for α = 1, such result boils down to the proposition 1 in with perfect csit.

remark 2: the basic difference between perfect and imperect csit scenarios while analysing the dof of nors is the existence of residual interference. for example, when we consider perfect csit , nt ≥ k − gm + 1 ensures a sufficient number of transmit antennas to place the m th precoder in the null space of all of its unintended groups. inter group interference caused by such precoder can be fully eliminated. however, considering imperfect csit here, only primary inter group interference can be eliminated. at least one form of residual interference still exists. from the above discussion, when the number of transmit antennas is greater than k −g1+1, only residual interference will be seen by each user by controlling the beamformng directions and power allocation. otherwise, the system becomes overloaded. through beamforming and power conrol, the mmf dof does not collapse to zero directly as in multi user unicast or equal group multigroup multicast systems. when nt drops below k − g1 + 1, m − 1 groups can be regarded as underloaded, seeing only two forms of residual interference as given in the first equation of (17), while the remaining one group's received signal subspace is partially sacrificed. as a result, a mmf dof of α 2 is achieved through power control. when nt drops below k − gm + 1, each multicast group sees interference from all of its unintended groups. the mmf dof drops to 0.

r is the maximum number of groups which can be regarded as underloaded and served by rs beamforming when the system is overloaded. the inequality indicates that the results provided here are achievable, yet not necessarly optimum. the achievability and insight are described as follows.

1) achievability of proposition 2: when the system is underloaded, i.e. nt ≥ k − g1 + 1, we design pm ∈ (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:9)hh null , which follows the same logic as nors. the direcion of pc is chosen randomly. consider the power allocation such that (cid:2)p1(cid:2)2 = · · · = (cid:2)pm (cid:2)2 = p δ m , and (cid:2)pc(cid:2)2 = p − p δ, where δ ∈ [0, 1] is a power partition factor. the signal received by user k writes as ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨ ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩ it can be observed that sc is firstly decoded at each user with (cid:2) p 1−δ sinr γc,k scaling as o . the common stream can m provide a dof of 1 − δ. since rc = m=1 cm, sharing rc equally amongst groups leads to max min fairness, and dc,m = 1−δ m is achieved by each group. after removing sc, each user (cid:3) then decodes sμ(k) with γk scaling as o . for all k ∈ k, we have dk = min {α, δ}. therefore, the mmf dof m + min {α, δ} can be achieved. drs = minm∈m drs by setting δ = α, drs reaches its maximum value at 1−α m +α. next, in overloaded scenarios, i.e. 1 ≤ nt < k − g1 + 1, we consider a special case of rs where groups are divided into two subsets, namely mr ⊆ m and mc = m \ mr. specifically, mr is a subset which can be treated as underoaded and served by rs beamforming, while mc are the remaining groups and served by degraded beamforming. based on this mixed scheme, messages are split such that wm → {wm,c, wm,p} for all m ∈ mr, and wm → {wm,c} for all m ∈ mc. such scheme leads to (cid:2)pm(cid:2)2 = 0 for all m ∈ mc. the size of mr and mc are denoted by mr = |mr| and mc = |mc| = m − mr respectively. to gain insight into the subset partition, we define (cid:2) p min{α,δ}

according to (13), nl is the minimum number of transmitting antennas required to regard groups {1, · · · , l} as underloaded while disregarding all the remaining groups. conversely, if nt satisfies nl ≤ nt < nl+1, l is interpreted as the maximum number of mr. we can define it as

firstly, sc is decoded at each user by treating all the other (cid:3) (cid:2) p 1−δ streams as noise. γc,k is observed to scale as o (35)

(37) for k ∈ k. hence, the common stream achieves a dof of m 1 − δ. since the common rate rc = m=1 cm is divided amongst mr and mc, we introduce a fraction z ∈ [0, 1] m∈mr cm = zrc, and of the common rate such that (cid:8) m∈mc cm = (1 − z) rc . this leads to dc,m = z(1−δ) for m ∈ mr and dc,m = (1−z)(1−δ) for m ∈ mc. m−mr after removing sc through sic, it can be seen that γk scales in the first subset mr. hence, we have as o dk = min {α, δ} for all k ∈ {gm | m ∈ mr}. the groupof drs

to achieve max min fairness, equal group dofs between mr and mc are required. on one hand, we assume δ ≥ α, and the equation can be written as

note that there are two variables δ and z on both sides of (39). since the two variables cannot be solved simultaneusly, we fix one variable to maximize at least one side of (39) while reserving the other variable on both sides. for example, let δ = α in this case, and then calculate the remaining variable z according to z (1 − α) mr

on the other hand, we assume δ < α. the equation in (39)

there are still two variables δ and z in (41). in this case, we can set z = 0 to maximize the right side of (41) and calculate δ according to

by substituting the solution δ = 1+m−mr into arbitrary 1+m−mr for all m ∈ side of (42), the group dof drs m = m is derived. since δ = 1 1+m−mr < α, we obtain the 1+m−mr < α ≤ 1 for this case. 1 corresponding condition above all, the achievable mmf dof of rs is summarized on the right side of proposition 2. when α = 1, such result boils down to the achievability of proposition 3 in with perfect csit. in overloaded scenarios, it is noteworthy that < α ≤ 1 is not a function of α and the drs with is the same as that achieved with perfect csit. thus, one can without affecting the relax the csit quality up to mmf dof. however, in the other case when 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 1+m−m ∗ r , drs diminishes as the csit quality reduces.

the interference seen by each (cid:3) user k ∈ {gm | m ∈ mr} after sic scales as o . as discussed above, we have two assumptions, namely δ ≥ α and δ < α. when δ ≥ α, this residual interference cannot be ignored. by setting the power partition factor δ → α, we can reduce it to the noise level and at the same time for all k ∈ k. to increase γc,k which scales as o achieve max min fairness, the common rate factor z is then managed to obtain equal group dofs among groups in mr and mc . 0 ≤ α ≤ is derived as a corresponding range of this case. the mmf dof reduces as α goes down. otherwise, when δ < α, such interference is always at the noise level. by setting z → 0, all the common rate rc contributes to cm, for all m ∈ mc . the rs scheme used by mr boils down to nors. meanwhile, the group dofs of all m ∈ mc are maximized. then, we further manage the power partition factor δ to achieve max min fairness < α ≤ 1 is derived as the amongst all groups. corresponding range. in this case, changing α will no longer affect mmf dof because the interference seen by each user k ∈ {gm | m ∈ mr} after sic is always at the noise level. the mmf dof performance remains the same as that achieved with perfect csit. such behavior is not observed in partiallyverloaded nors. it can be observed in (17) that the power of interference seen by each user k ∈ k \ gx and k ∈ gx scales (cid:2) p 1−α as o respectively. α will always affect mmf dof as o cannot be ignored unless considering perfect csit. to get more insight into the gains provided by rs over nors, we substitute (36) into (33) and yield (43). 2) insight: from (37),

by comparing (43) with (11), we can see that the achievable mmf dof of rs is always superior than d∗n ors, and hence d∗rs ≥ d∗n ors is guaranteed. the gain of rs over nors is 1−α m when the system is underloaded. once nt ≥ nm is violated, the range of partially overloaded nors k − gm + 1 ≤ nt < k − g1 + 1, (i.e. nm−1 + g1 ≤ nt < nm ) locates within the range nm−1 ≤ nt < nm . for any 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, the achievable mmf dof of rs is still greater than nors. once nt drops below nm−1 + g1, by taking nt = nm−1 as an example, the number of antennas is not sufficient to eliminate any inter group interference through nors beamforming. d∗n ors collapses to 0. for rs, d∗rs is kept by exploiting all the m ∗ r streams and transmitting the remaining stream through degraded beamforming. this is carried on until rs reducing to a single stream degraded beamforming. a single dof is split amongst all the groups. therefore, d∗rs ≥ 1 m > 0 is guaranteed. for the particular the group size are equal, (i.e. gm = g, case where all ∀m ∈ m), there is not partially overloaded scenario in (11). when nt drops below k − g + 1, d∗n ors decreases from α to 0 directly. however, the expression of d∗rs remains the same as (43), which is always greater than 1 m .

remark 3: the obtained mmf dofs of different strategies are listed in table i, where the first row represents underloaded and the others are results of overloaded systems.

from the above discussion, the mmf dof analysis in the underloaded regime is similar for rs and nors. each user sees only residual interference by managing the beamforming directions and power allocation. a gain of 1−α m is obtained. thus, we can conclude that imperfect csit, there is a mmf dof gain of rs over nors when the system is underloaded. this contrasts with perfect csit scearios where both underloaded nors and rs can achieve full mmf dof of 1. overloaded rs is more challenging since both residual interference and group partitioning method should be considered. considers a special case where the groups are partitioned into two subsets, namely md ⊆ m which are served using nors, and mc ⊆ m \ md served by degraded beamforming. the number of groups in md is set as the maximum number of groups that can be served by interferenceree nors (i.e. achieving a group dof of 1 each). however, in this work considering imperfect csit, nors can no longer reach a mmf dof of 1. as shown in table 1, the maximum achievable mmf dof is α when the system is underloaded, while rs outperforms nors slightly. thus, we consider a different subset partitioning in this work where the groups are divided into mr ⊆ m and mc ⊆ m \ mr. the number of groups in mr is chosen as the maximum number of groups which can be served by rs and achieve a mmf dof of 1−α m + α. mc is still served by degraded beamforming. accordingly, from the results summarised in table i, rs is shown to provide mmf dof gains and outperform nors in overloaded systems.

all the discussions above motivate the use of rs over nors from a dof perspective. however, dof is an asympotically high snr metric. it remains to be seen whether the dof gain translate into rate gains. to that end, the design rate maximization at finite snr needs of rs for to be investigated. beamforming schemes that achieve proposition 1 and proposition 2 are not necessarily optimum from a mmf rate sense. therefore, the beamforming direcions, power allocation and rate partition can be elaborated by formulating mmf rate optimization problems as we see in the next section. importantly, the dof analysis provides fundaental grounds, helps drawing insights into the performance limits of various strategies and guide the design of efficient strategy (rate splitting in this case).

iv. optimization and solution

in this section, an optimization problem is formulated to achieve mmf among multiple co channel multicast groups subject to a flexible power constraint with imperfect csit. mmf ergodic rate is the metric for both rs and nors. it reflects long term performance over varying channel states. given a long sequence of channel estimates, the mmf ergodic rate (er) can be measured by updating precoders based on each short term mmf average rate (ar). to begin with, the relationship between ar and er is introduced. ars of user k are short term measures defined as (cid:2) (cid:3) h, (cid:9)h rc,k (cid:3) (cid:2) h, (cid:9)h (cid:23) (cid:24)

(44b) here, ars have captured the expected performance over csit error distribution for a given channel state estimand rk tion, where rc,k are determined by (cid:5) (cid:4) h, (cid:9)h . according to the law of total expectation, the ers of user k can be expressed by

it turns out that measuring ers is transformed into measuring ars over the variation of (cid:9)h. therefore, the mmf er of rs {frs (p )}, where frs (p ) is a can be characterized by e stochastic problem of achieving mmf ar for a given channel estimate (cid:9)h.

by solving frs (p ), c (cid:2) and p = [pc, p1, · · · pm ] are jointly optimized. since the average com m=1 cm = mink∈k rc,k, we use mon rate is given by rc = constraint (47) to ensure sc is decoded by each user. constraint (48) implies that each portion of rc is non negative and (49) is the transmit power constraint described in section ii.

similarly, the corresponding stochastic problem in nors

where p = [p1, · · · , pm ] is optimized to solve fn ors (p ). (51) is the flexible transmit power constraint. nors is a subcheme of rs by discarding the common stream. solving fn ors (p ) is a special case of frs (p ) by fixing c = 0 and (cid:2)pc(cid:2)2 = 0. we will focus on solving the rs based problem in the following discussion.

sample average approximation (saa) is then adopted to convert frs (p ) into a deterministic problem denoted rs (p ). for a given (cid:9)h and sample index set s (cid:2) by f (s) {1, · · · , s}, we construct a realization sample h(s) (cid:2) (cid:5) (cid:4) h(s) = (cid:9)h + (cid:12)h(s) | (cid:9)h, s ∈ s containing s i.i.d realizations (cid:2) h | drawn from a conditional distribution with density fh| (cid:3) (cid:9)h . these realizations are available at the transmitter and can be used to approximate the ars experienced by each user through sample average functions (safs). when s → ∞, 1 s (s) c,k = lim s→∞ r

(cid:2) , s ∈ s are the rates based h(s) where rc,k on the realization sample h(s). accordingly, the deterministic problem can be written as and rk

note that f (s)

rs (p ) is a non convex optimization problem

which is very challenging to solve.

the wmmse approach, initially proposed in , is effecive in solving problems containing non convex superimposed rate expressions, i.e. rs problems. in this work, we use ao (alternating optimization) and a modified wmmse approach to solve the above problem. a deterministic saf version of the rate wmmse relationship relationship is constructed in such that

this relationship holds for the whole set of stationary and

points . for a given channel estimate, ξ mmse(s) ξ k the safs. we have ξ (cid:8) mmse(s) s ξ k ξmmse(s) k the sets of optimum equalizers are defined as gmmse (cid:4) (cid:4) c,k gmmse(s) gmmse(s) | s ∈ s and gmmse (cid:4) k c,k k ummse(s) the sets of optimum weights are ummse = (cid:5) c,k c,k ummse(s) s ∈ s | s ∈ s . from the k perspective of each user, the composite optimum equalizers and composite optimum weights are respectively represent average wmmses approximated by s=1 ξmmse(s) = 1 and s , where ξmmse(s) (cid:8) s

= 1 and s are associated with the s th realization in h(s). = (cid:5) . | k c,k

now, we can transform f (s) problem. rs (p ) into an equivalent wmmse

s.t. cm + rm ≥ rg, ∀m ∈m (61) and r = [r1, · · · , rm ] are auxiliary varihere rg satisfies the ables. furthermore, if rs (p ), (p∗, c∗) will satisfy kkt optimality conditions of w (s) the kkt optimality conditions of f (s) rs (p ). note that the wmses are convex in each of their corresponding variables (e.g. equalizers, weights or precoding matrix) when fixing the other two. considering the block wise convexity property, we use the ao algorithm proposed in to solve w (s) rs (p ). each iteration is composed of two steps. variables in the equivalent wmmse problem are optimized iteratively in an alternating manner. the algorithm is guaranteed to converge as the objective function is bounded above for a given power constraint. rg increases monotonically until convergence as the iteration process goes on.

v. performance evaluation and application

in this section, the performance of rs and nors are evaluted over rayleigh fading channels (representative of convenional cellular terrestrial systems) with a total transmit power constraint. during simulation, entries of h are independently drawn from cn (0, 1). following the csit uncertainty model, entries of (cid:12)h are also i.i.d complex gaussian drawn from e,k = p −α. herein, we evaln t σ2 uate the mmf ergodic rate by averaging over 100 channel estimates. for each given channel estimate (cid:9)h = h − (cid:12)h, its corresponding mmf average rate is approximated by saa method, and the sample size s is set to be 1000. h(s) is the set of conditional realizations available at the transmitter. the s th conditional realization in h(s) is given by h(s) = (cid:9)h + (cid:12)h(s), where (cid:12)h(s) follows the above csit error distribution.

we firstly consider an underloaded system with nt = 6 transmit antennas, g = 3 groups and k = 6 users. the group sizes are respectively g1 = 1, g2 = 2, g3 = 3. fig. 1 presents the mmf er of rs and nors versus an increasing snr under various csit qualities. for perfect csit, beaming an interference free stream to each group simultaneously is possible since the system is underloaded. both rs and nors achieve full mmf dof and the perforance of such two schemes are nearly identical. however, rs shows a little improvement in the rate sense compared with nors due to its more flexible architecture. for imperfect csit, the superiority of rs over nors becomes more evident. it can be observed in fig. 1 that the mmf dof disparity between rs and nors gradually appears as the csit uncerainty increases. the mmf dofs of nors and rs in fig. 1 are fig. 1. mmf rate performance. nt = 6 antennas, k = 6 users, m = 3 groups, g1, g2, g3 = 1, 2, 3 users.

respectively α and 1−α m +α, which follow the results in table i. this implies that the common stream of rs can provide a dof gain of 1−α m and consequently mmf rate gains in underloaded regimes,

transmit antenas to 4 and the system becomes partially overloaded (k − g3 + 1 ≤ nt < k − g1 + 1). when considering perect csit, rs and nors achieve identical mmf dofs at 1 2 . it follows the perfect csit results in table i. meanwhile, it also follows the results of imperfect csit by setting α = 1. multiplexing gains are partially achieved. a small rate gap between the two schemes is observed although their mmf dofs are equal. next, it comes to imperfect csit. we can see that the merit of rs over nors becomes more obvious compared with underloaded regime. from fig. 2, the mmf dofs of nors (blue curves) are approximately α 2 , which match the theoretical result in (11). csit imperfectness can affect the system performance significantly. considering rs, we have m ∗ r = 2 as a result of n2 ≤ nt < n3 in this specific setup. substituting m ∗ r = 2 and m = 3 into (33) or the overloaded results in table i, we obtain in fig. 2, we reduce the number of

, 0 ≤ α ≤ 0.5. (66) in addition, we have d∗n ors = α 2 . such dof performance is exhibited in fig. 2. all the simulation results are inline with the theoretical mmf dofs in table i. due to the benefits of rs, the system is able to maintain its mmf dofs at 1 2 for all 0.5 < α ≤ 1 in this example. when 0 ≤ α ≤ 0.5, the mmf dofs decrease slightly to α + 1−2α , which is still greater than the α 2 achieved by nors. compared with the underloaded scenario in fig. 1, the gaps between rs (red curves) and nors (blue curves) increase. in other words, the superiority of rs over nors becomes more apparent when the system is partiallyverloaded.

furthermore, we keep the same setting as in fig. 2 but change the group sizes to be symmetric, i.e. g1 = 2, g2 = 2, g3 = 2. it is noted that the system at present becomes fullyverloaded (1 ≤ nt < k − g3 + 1). as illustrated in fig. 3, rs outperforms nors to a great extent in both perfect csit and imperfect csit scenarios. rs maintains the same mmf dofs as in fig. 2. however, all the multiplexing gains of nors are sacrificed and collapse to 0. the corresponding rate performance of nors gradually saturates as snr grows, thus resulting in severe mmf rate limitation. through the simulaion results over rayleigh fading channel, it is demonstrated that rs based multigroup multicast beamforming is more robust to csit imperfectness than the conventional nors scheme. rs is able to further exploit spatial multiplexing gains and achieve higher mmf performance in various setups. in particular, rs provides significant gains over nors in overloaded regimes with imperfect csit. above all, the gains of rs for multigroup multicast in the presence of imperfect csit are shown via simulations in both underloaded and overloaded deployments. this contrasts with where gains in the presence of perfect csit were demonstrated primarily in the overloaded scenarios.

b. application to multibeam satellite systems

in order to show the versatility of rs, the application of rs based multigroup multicast beamforming to multibeam satellite systems is addressed in this section. satellite comunication, supported by its inherent wide coverage, can not only provide connectivity in unserved areas but also decongest fig. 4. architecture of multibeam satellite system.

high dense terrestrial networks. in recent years, the multibeam satellite system leverages aggressive frequency reuse across multiple narrow spot beams to support higher throughput . note that the framing structure of satellite standard dvb s2x creates multigroup multicast transmission . inter beam interference management techniques need to be implemented. in this work, we focus on a ka band multibeam satellite system with multiple single antenna terrestrial users served by a geostationary orbit (geo) satellite as shown in fig. 4. a single gateway is employed in this system, and the feeder link between gateway and satellite is assumed to be noiseless. let nt denote the number of antenna feeds. the array fed reflector can transform nt feed signals into m transmitted signals (i.e. one signal per beam) to be radiated over the multieam coverage area . considering single feed per beam (sfpb) architecture which is popular in modern satellites such as eutelsat ka sat , , only one feed is required to generate one beam (i.e. nt = m ). since the multibeam satellite system is in practice user overloaded, we assume that ρ (ρ > 1) users are served simultaneously by each beam. users per beam are uniformly distributed within the satellite coverage area. ideally, the user selection and beamforming can be jointly designed. however this is out of the scope of this paper and can be explored as the future work. k = ρnt is the total number of users.

1) multibeam satellite channel: the main difference between satellite and terrestrial communications lies in the channel characteristics including free space loss, radition pattern and atmospheric fading. denote ◦ as the hadamard product, and the satellite channel h ∈ cnt×k is formulated as h = b ◦ q (67) b ∈ rnt×k is a matrix composed of receiver antenna gain, free space loss and satellite multibeam antenna gain. its (n, k) th entry can be modeled as

4π dk λ where gr is the user terminal antenna gain, dk is the distance between user k and the satellite, λ is the carrier wavelength, κ is the boltzmann constant, tsys is the receiving system noise κtsysbw (68) temperature and bw denotes the user link bandwidth. gn,k is the multibeam antenna gain from the n th feed to the k th user. it mainly depends on the satellite antenna radiation pattern and user locations. in this model, gn,k is approximated by :

where un,k = 2.07123 sin (θn,k) / sin (θ3db). given the k th user position, θn,k is the angle between it and the center of n th beam with respect to the satellite, and θ3db is a 3 db loss angle compared with the beam center. the maximum beam gain observed at each beam center is denoted by gmax. j1 and j3 are respectively first kind bessel functions with order 1 and order 3. moreover, the rain fading effect and signal phases are characterized in matrix q ∈ cnt×k. its (n, k) th entry is given by

where χk,db = 20 log10 (χk) is commonly modeled as a lognormal random variable, i.e. ln (χk,db) ∼ n (μ, σ). φk is a phase uniformly distributed between 0 and 2π. it should be noted that both the fading coefficients and phases are not distinguished among different antenna feeds. the reason is that we consider a line of sight (los) environment and the satellite antenna feed spacing is not large enough compared with the communication distance .

2) performance over satellite channels: then, we evaluate the application of rs in multibeam satellite communications. results of mmf problems are obtained by averaging 100 satellite channel realizations. since non flexible on board payloads prevent power sharing between beams, per feed power constraints are adopted. system parameters are sumarized in table ii. fig. 5 shows the curves of mmf rates among nt = 7 beams versus an increasing per feed available transmit power. we assume two users per beam, i.e. ρ = 2. for perfect csit, rs achieves around 25% gains over nors. for imperfect csit, rs is seen to outperform nors with 31% and 44% gains respectively when α = 0.8 and α = 0.6. accordngly, the advantage of employing rs in multigroup multicast beamforming is still observed in multibeam satellite systems. through partially decoding the interference and partially treat the interference as noise, rs is more robust to the csit uncertainty and overloaded regime than nors. such benefit of rs exactly tackles the challenges of multibeam satellite communications. the conventional 4 color scheme performs the worst compared with full frequency reuse schemes. fig. 5. mmf rate versus per feed available power. nt = 7 antennas, k = 14 users, ρ = 2 users.

fig. 6 depicts the influence of a wider range of csit quality on both strategies. here, we set the per feed available transmit power to be 80 watts. as csit error scaling factor drops, the mmf rate gap between rs and nors increases gradually, which implies the gains of our proposed rs scheme become more and more apparent as the csit quality decreases. in addition, the impact of user number per frame is also studied. since all the users within a beam share the same precoding vector, the beam rate is determined by the user with the lowest sinr. considering ρ = 2, 4, 6 users per frame, it is clear that increasing the number of users per frame results in system performance degradation in both rs and nors.

moreover, the impact of different transmit power constraints is studied. based on the fair pac assumption, each transmit antenna cannot radiate a power more than p/nt. compared with tpc, the existence of pac will inevitably restrict the flexibility of beamforming design. taking imperfect csit with α = 0.8 as an example, fig. 7 shows the mmf rates when considering tpc and pac. it is noticed that the practical pac reduces mmf rate performance slightly in both rs and nors. in fig. 8, the performance of a hot spot configuration, (e.g. with 8 users in the central beam and 1 user each in the other beams) is compared with the above uniform setting. we can observe that the rate improvement provided by rs is more obvious than nors, which means that rs is better at fig. 7. mmf rate constrained by pac/ tpc. nt = 7 antennas, k = 14 users, ρ = 2 users, imperfect csit: α = 0.8.

managing interference in such hot spot scenario. specifically, for perfect csit, rs outperforms nors with 42% gains. for imperfect csit, rs achieves higher gains at around 54%.

in this work, we study rsma for multigroup multicast beamforming in the presence of imperfect csit. through mmf dof analysis, rs is shown to provide gains in both underloaded and overloaded systems compared with the conentional linear precoding (nors). a generic mmf optimizaion problem is then formulated and solved by developing a modified wmmse approach together with an ao algorithm. the effectiveness of adopting rsma for multigroup multicast is evaluated through simulations in a wide range of setups. additionally, the proposed rsma framework is demonstrated very promising for multibeam satellite communications to manage its inter beam interference, taking into account pracical challenges such as csit uncertainty, practical per feed constraints, hot spots, uneven user distribution per beam and overloaded regimes.

l. yin and b. clerckx, "rate splitting multiple access for multibeam satellite communications," in proc. ieee int. conf. commun. workshops (icc), jun. 2020, pp. 1 6. a. a. ahmad, h. dahrouj, a. chaaban, a. sezgin,

and m. s. alouini, "interference mitigation via rate splitting and common message decoding in cloud radio access networks," ieee access, vol. 7, pp. 80350 80365, 2019.