recent trends in ip/ngeo satellite communication systems: transport, routing, and mobility management concerns

a promising and strong market for service proiders and operators in the near future.

this article surveys the ongoing research efforts tailored to ngeo satellite communicaions systems. the remainder of this article is structured as follows. we give a brief description of the general configurations of ngeo satellite constellations. we highlight the key technical issues in the development of ngeo broadband satellite communication systems. we also preent some recently proposed solutions to these issues. the article concludes with a summary recapping the most important research issues elaborated on in this article.

general ngeo configurations

internetworking with satellites began with the use of individual satellites in geostationary orbits (geo). for more than three decades, geo satellite systems have been successful in providng commercial services, such as television distriution and long distance voice telephony. despite this wide commercial usage of geo sysems, requirements for lower propagation delays, in conjunction with coverage of high latitude regions, have turned the light on new ngeo satellite communication systems called low earth orbit (leo) or medium earth orbit (meo) satellite systems. ngeo systems promise to offer services with much lower latency and terinal power requirements than those offered by geo systems. table 1 lists some proposed worldwide ngeo constellations and the distinuishing features of their orbits.

without loss of generality, satellite systems can be classified into two kinds: broadcasting (noninteractive one way) and interactive bidirecional satellite systems. in a broadcasting satelite system, each terminal has a receive only satellite dish to collect data delivered from a server in the high speed satellite channel. due to the lack of an economical satellite return chanel, the reverse path to the server can be providd by a terrestrial link.

enlightened by the idea of using satellites as a solution of the last mile problem, several com gateway

terrestrial network b

maintaining high elevation angles (table 1). an architecture based on a combination of this contellation and terrestrial networks was proved to be solid for building a significantly large scale, efficient, and global video on demand system where the service is designated at a hybrid netork made of fixed and mobile nodes .

the recent financial failure of the iridium sysem has made researchers realize that systems optimized for only voice or low data rates serices may turn out unfavorable. the success of next generation ngeo satellite networks thus hinges on their ability to provide broadband data rates applications; similar in spirit to today's internet. to realize the vision of an ngeo satellite based internet, several technical issues should be taken into account.

first, with respect to routing, a detailed description of major routing issues and possible solutions are given. issues related to mobility management are then discussed. finally, given the widespread acceptance of the internet protool (ip), advantages and drawbacks of recent inter working techniques to support ip in ngeo satellite systems are portrayed in detail. some possible solutions are also suggested.

routing over ngeo satellite systems current terrestrial internet routing protocols, such as open shortest path first (ospf) and routing information protocol (rip), rely on exchanging topology information upon change or setup of a connection; that is, in a connectionriented manner. applying such schemes to rapidly and regularly changing ngeo satellite network topologies incurs substantial overhead. thus, several connectionless algorithms have been proposed to route data traffic over satellite constellations. they can be classified into two categories: constellation periodicity based routng and onboard routing schemes.

the basic idea behind protocols of the first category is to make use of the periodic and preictable nature of the constellation topology. 20

n figure 2. throughput performance comparison among refwa plus,

refwa, tcp westwood, tcp newreno, and tcp reno for different ber values. exploit geographical location information to make the mobility management independent from handovers. in the proposed method, the earth surface is divided into a number of cells, and the route.ids of a mobile node is associatd with the cell where the mobile node resides. mobile nodes are equipped with a global posiioning system (gps) receiver to find their location. a route.id changes and the correponding binding update occurs only when a mobile node moves to the neighboring cell. this reduces the number of update requests and eventually increases largely the system scalbility .

interworking techniques to support ip in ngeo satellite systems due to the universality of ip, an in depth undertanding of ip protocols and recognition of their merits and drawbacks in satellite networks are of vital importance. the effect of such a communiation environment on the working of tcp, which forms the backbone of internet protocol communication, underpins the research work outlined in the rest of this article. issues — it has been widely demonstrated that current tcp implementations exhibit poor perormance in ngeo satellite networks. the perormance issues of tcp stem from the inherent characteristics of satellite links, such as long propagation delays1 and high bit error rates (bers). in the first instance, a tcp sender takes a long time to increase its congestion winow during the slow start phase. additionally, when multiple connections with high variance in their round trip times (rtts) distribution share an intersatellite link, tcp results in drastically unfair bandwidth allocations. this issue becomes more substantial in case of frequent handover occurrences, a general characteristic of ngeo satellite networks. in the second instance a tcp sender operates on the conservative assumption that any segment loss is due to congestion. this assumption ignores the possibility of transient random errors that may be due to atmospheric factors. tcp is usually incapable of detecting the nature of the error, only its result. when an error occurs, a tcp sender backs off its transission rate and then applies a gradual increase to its reduced window size. while this backoff strategy avoids overloading the network with packets, it comes at the cost of significantly degraded goodput in case of link errors.

coping with delay related issues — to cope with the negative impact slow start has on the tcp perormance in ngeo systems, the congestion winow is initially set to a value larger than one packet but smaller than four packets in size. despite the advantages of this operation in improving tcp throughput, there are several problems. most notably, an increased value of the initial window would increase the burstiness of the sender and could exacerbate existing conestion in a network. reference has investiated the usage of low priority dummy segments to probe the availability of network resources without carrying any new information to the sender. other researchers have discussed the (1) in the sphere of tcp behavior under many competing flows in satellite networks, the refwa scheme appears to be the first comprehensive work that introduces the idea of explicit signaling and jointly addresses both efficiency and fairess of tcp in ngeo broadband satellite networks. mal values. reducing the cwnd to the ssthresh value, as in standard tcp, drastically throttles tcp throughput. the throughput degradation becomes more significant as the idle waiting time becomes longer due to the rto backoff algorithm. on the other hand, with refwa plus tcp senders keep on transmitting data more aggressively at cwnds equal to φdupack. although many packets get lost on the way because of link errors, some manage to reach the destination. this explains the 35 percent utiization experienced with refwa plus.

the design and development of ngeo satellite communication systems have been the subject of extensive research in recent literature and gained tremendous interest even at the commercial level. in this article we address some technical challenges in providing internet services over satellite communication systems. we discuss issues related to routing and mobility manageent. to demonstrate how ngeo satellite sysems interoperate with ip based technologies, a special focus was on the working of tcp over satellite networks. two recently proposed schemes are described: refwa and refwa plus. the refwa scheme aims to jointly improve both the efficiency and fairness of tcp over satellite networks. the refwa plus scheme, on the other hand, further improves the performance of the refwa scheme by reducing the effect of unnecessary shrinkage of transmision rate due to link errors on system efficiency.

in addition to what we have elaborate on in this article, some other important research issues, such as satellite resource management, qos support, and ip routing multicast protocols over ngeo satellite networks, are still to be identified and deserve further study. finally, it is our hope that the findings in this article may help better understanding of ngeo satellite communication systems while stimulating further work in the area.

acknowledgment the authors take great pleasure in acknowledgng the financial aid of the koden electronics co., ltd. to conduct part of this research work.

references t. taleb et al., "a geographical location based satellite selection scheme for a novel constellation composed of quasi geostationary satellites," proc. icc 2005, seoul, korea, may 2005.

a. donner, m. berioli, and m. werner, "mpls based satellite constellation networks," ieee jsac, vol. 22, no. 3, apr. 2004, pp. 438 48.

a. svigelj et al., "routing in isl networks considering empirical ip traffic," ieee jsac, vol. 22, no. 2, feb. 2004, pp. 261 72.