abstract— we introduce a new reconfigurable linear polarizaion and circular polarization (cp) antenna, based on a rectanguar waveguide (rwg) and a novel reconfigurable polarizer. the polarizer consists of two orthogonal apertures. the apertures transform the linear polarization of the dominant mode of the rwg antenna to cp. each of these apertures is loaded by a p i n diode to alter its electrical length. this length difference provides the phase rotation needed to obtain cp. the signal polarization of the antenna can be selected by changing the applied bias voltage of p i n diodes as right handed (rh)/left handed (lh) cp. we can also achieve linear polarization if both diodes are on or off. the reconfigurable polarizer acts as a bandpass filter, since the apertures can be considered as complementary electrically small resonators. this self filtering capability is useful for reduction out of band noise in a communication system such as satellite links. the proposed antenna is designed to operate at 2.65 ghz, but the same approach can be applied to other frequency bands. the measurement results show a very good rh/lhcp and they are in good agreement with simulations.

linear polarization, p i n diode, polarizer, reconfigurable polarization antenna, rectangular waveguide (rwg), satellite communication. index terms— circular polarization (cp), filtenna,

i n today's technology, there is a shift toward having

smart and cognitive wireless systems, which requires antenas to reconfigure their radiation characteristics to sense and communicate more efficiently . in particular, reconfigurable antennas as front end components in wireless systems have become an inseparable part of modern software defined radios and satellite communication systems , .

we present a polarization reconfigurable antenna (pra) based on an open ended rectangular waveguide (rwg) antenna and a novel reconfigurable polarizer. pras provide different orthogonal polarizations, e.g., right handed (rh)/ left handed (lh) circular polarization (cp) or linear polarizaion. they increase the throughput of communication channels by using different polarizations in the same frequency band.

manuscript received may 10, 2017; revised september 18, 2017; accepted october 23, 2017. date of publication october 30, 2017; date of current version january 2, 2018. this work was supported by the u.s. national science foundation career award under award 1620902. (corresponding author: danilo erricolo.)

the authors are with the department of electrical and computer engineering, university of illinois at chicago, chicago, il 60607 usa (e mail: farzami.farhad@gmail.com; seiran.kh@gmail.com; smida@uic.edu; derric1@uic.edu).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available a pra that performs cp is of interest to wireless commuication designers, specifically satellite communications , because cp is more resilient to signal degradation due to atmospheric propagation condition, such as the faraday effect that is severe at lower frequencies. in addition, cp does not need any polarization alignment in transponders, thus realizing a reliable communication link.

there are several techniques to achieve pras, including: 1) using rf switches such as p i n diodes to form a reconfigrable feed network that alters the current distribution and 2) using loaded radiators to change surface current patterns .

another technique to achieve pra systems is using polarzers to transform the type of polarization. polarizers may be dielectric slabs , grid planes , meander line patterns , anisotropic metasurfaces, or frequency selective surfaces . polarizers are placed in front of the radiator or in a reflect array arrangement. these polarizer structures can also be loaded by rf switches to alter current surface paths in a symmetric way to generate two orthogonal polarizations. polarizers and septa have been used in rwg antenna in order to achieve cp , . rwg antennas are widely implemented in satellite systems as a feed of a reflector or high gain horn antenna. reliability, high gain and radiation effiiency are the main factors that increase the demand for these antennas. in waveguide antennas, the operation frequency is bounded by the cutoff frequency of the dominant mode and the next one . thus, waveguide antennas are broadband compared to the narrowband signals used in satellite comunications. consequently, a filter is needed to reduce the noise captured by the antenna in the frequency bands out of the satellite frequency of operation. in order to decrease the physical size and the cost of the system, this filter is integrated within the waveguide antenna. in , a polarizer that also acts as a bandpass filter was introduced to reduce the captured noise and transform the linear polarization to circular. this polarizer only transfers the linear polarization of the dominant mode of an open ended rwg antenna to lhcp.

we introduce a novel reconfigurable polarizer that achieves linear, lhcp and rhcp in an rwg antenna. the proposed polarizer consists of two orthogonal slots, loaded by two p i n diodes near their ends to change their physical length. they are also loaded by a cross shape parasitic trace to lower the resonance frequency and miniaturize the length of the slots. we have also proposed an off center slots configuration (a) equal length cross shape slot at the side wall of a metallic

electric field distribution in unequal length slots at (a) t = 0,

to have perfect axial ratio (axr) by just using two p i n diodes instead of four, which are needed for a symmetric structure. the proposed polarizer has a resonance behavior to form a bandpass response and reduce the captured noise. the proposed polarizer is an ideal candidate for any other narrow band operation frequency. it is easily integrable with waveguide adapters and it does not require to redesign the waveguide antenna or horn antenna separately. this technique reduces the fabrication cost, where a transponder needs to be upgraded to a reconfigurable system.

this paper is organized as in the following. in section ii, we investigate the radiation characteristic of an rwg antenna with cross shape slot polarizer. the novel reconfigurable polarizer that achieves rh/lhcp and linear polarization is disussed in section iii. conclusions are provided in section iv.

shapes have been used in waveguide antennas as filters or as combined filter and polaizer , , . an aperture can be modeled as complementary of an electrically small resonator and can transform the electromagnetic field polarization as well as perform as a bandpass filter . a cross shape slot with equal length at the side wall of an rwg cavity is shown in fig. 1(a). fig. 3. cross slots loaded by a cross shape trace in a wr284 waveguide adaptor.

fig. 4. resonance frequency of the antenna in fig. 3 based on the slot and parasitic trace length variation (ls and l p ).

analytic solutions to investigate vertical and cross shape slot characteristics in an rwg cavities were discussed in and . the electric field distribution of a single slot can be considered sinusoidal [see fig. 1(a)]. the electric field distribution of an equal length cross slot is shown in fig. 1(b). when both slots have the same length, the resulting radiation polarization is linear, since there is not any relative phase difference between the two electric field components. a 90° phase shift to create cp can be achieved if two slots are slightly different in length. thus by using unequal length cross shape slots, we are able to transform linear polarization to cp. fig. 2 shows the electric field distribution of unequalength slots. as can be seen, the resulting electric field rotates with time. based on the slots' length with respect to each other, we can obtain either rh or lhcp.

we propose a new polarizer using a cross slot loaded by a cross shape trace (see fig. 3). the cross slot and cross trace are etched on a dielectric substrate. the lengths ls of the slot and the parasitic trace l p determine the resonance frequency fr of the antenna. fig. 4 shows fr based on various values of (ls and l p). as can be seen, for fixed values of ls, fr decreases when increasing l p and it implies that fr decreases. by adding the cross shape trace to the slots, in other words, the system has been miniaturized without any need to use a meander cross slot, as proposed in . we used a standard waveguide wr284 with length wa = 72 mm, width wb = 34 mm, and cavity length wd = 87 mm. the polarizer fig. 5. (a) schematic of the linear to circular polarizer with loaded cross shape slot for f = 2.65 ghz. (b) fabricated prototype. all dimensions in mm are ls1 = 37.75, ls2 = 35, l p = 25.75, w p = 0.5, ws = 2, and w0 = 3.

fig. 6. simulated and measured s11 of the open ended rwg antenna with and without the polarizer.

substrate thickness is h = 0.762 mm (30 mil) with dielectric constant εr = 3.

from fig. 4, the length of the slot and parasitic trace can be extracted to achieve a desired operation frequency. the width of the slots ws and parasitic element w p can also affect fr and operation bandwidth. we selected the dimensions of the slots and parasitic element to have the operation frequency at 2.65 ghz as the fixed satellite communication frequency spectrum allocation.

the schematic and fabricated version of the proposed linear to circular polarizer is shown in fig. 5. in this case, ls1 > ls2 to obtain lhcp, otherwise the resulting polarization will be rhcp. the simulation results obtained by using the high frequency structure simulator (hfss) from ansys and measured s11 of the open ended rwg antenna with and without the proposed polarizer are shown in fig. 6. as can be seen, the polarizer acts as a bandpass filter, which is necessary for rejecting out of band signals. there are two close resonance frequencies, where the lower frequency is due to the longer slot (ls1) and the higher frequency is due to the shorter slot (ls2). the axr and radiation pattern of the antenna is simulated and measured in the andrew electromagnetics laboratory anechoic room (see fig. 7) for measurements coordinates. as can be seen in fig. 8, cp is achieved in the middle of two resonance frequencies, since both slots radiate electromagnetic waves with equal magnitude and 90° phase fig. 7. anechoic room coordinates for the antenna measurement.

fig. 8. axr of the open ended rwg antenna with the polarizer.

shift at that frequency band. the simulated axr contour for three values of axr = 1, 2, and 3 db in the φ − θ plane is shown in fig. 9. this figure shows that axr< 3 db for at least elevation angles −30° < θ < 30◦ and 360° azimuth angle φ. this low axr is adequate for satellite communications, where the misalignment polarization is important in link budget margin calculation. in order to improve the matching and the axr bandwidth, the slots are wider in the middle of each arm to tune the operation frequency band, return loss, and axr. the normalized radiation pattern of the antenna with polarzer is shown in fig. 10 for two orthogonal planes zx and yz based on the coordinates of fig. 7. the maximum simulated realized gain is 6.2 db with 97% radiation efficiency. the half power beamwidth is 80◦. fig. 10. normalized radiation pattern of the lhcp antenna in (a) zx plane and (b) yz plane. the simulation result (s) frequency is 2.65 ghz and the measurement result (m) frequency is 2.68 ghz.

fig. 11. polarizer integrated with rf switches. surface current is plotted when (s1, s3) is on (at the top right) and (s1, s3) is off (at the bottom left) while (s2, s4) is off.

in section ii, we showed that cp can be achieved by using two orthogonal slots with different lengths. in this section, we propose a reconfigurable polarizer that can achieve both rh/lhcp and liner polarizations by adjusting the slot lengths. we start with two orthogonal slots with the same geometrical length, as shown in fig. 11. then, we add one rf switch near the end of each slot, as shown by s1 to s4 so that the electrical lengths of the slots can be controlled. the rf switch, when it is in its on state, provides a path for the surface current and thus reduces the effective slots length. the position of the rf switch is determined by the slot lengths difference to make the required cp.

note that, when a switch is on, the length of the slot is shorter than when it is off. thus, based on each pair of switches status, different polarizations will be achieved. for example, when only the pair of switches (s1, s3) is on, the polarization is rhcp, if the other pair (s2, s4) is on, the polarization is lhcp. when both pairs are on or off simultaneously, the polarization is linear (along the wider dimension of the waveguide), since both slots have the same length.

in this paper, we proposed a reconfigurable polarizer using only two rf switches instead of four (see fig. 12). we used p i n diodes as the switches. as illustrated in this figure, we reduced the number of switches, which decreases the complexty of circuit design and the dc power consumption. however, the configuration asymmetric which degrades it makes the axr. to overcome this degradation, we introduce fig. 12. by p i n diodes. (b) fabricated prototype. (a) layout of reconfigurable polarizer with adjustable slots loaded

fig. 13. s parameters measurement in (a) forward bias and (b) 0 v bias voltage. equivalent circuit model of p i n diode bar6302 v and

an offset α from the center of the cross slot relative to the waveguide aperture center o (see fig. 12). consequently, the electric field distribution on the slots is optimized to have the minimum possible axr.

the p i n diodes are from infineon technologies with part number bar63 02v. to accurately model the diode in hfss, we need to find equivalent circuit model values. a p i n diode shows a good conductance when a forward dc bias is applied . in the forward bias, the p i n diode can be modeled as a low value resistor in series with an inductor while it shows high resistance value for 0 v dc bias. circuit models and lumped element values for this diode are shown in fig. 13. the values of the equivalent circuit elements have been extracted by keysight advanced design system and compared with the measured s parameters of the diode. at 2.65 ghz, for the forward dc current i f = 20 ma, the insertion loss il = 0.16 db with return loss rl =18.5 db [see fig. 13(a)]. simulation and measurements of the axr of the open ended

when the diode is off (vdc = 0 v), isolation is i = 8.5 db [see fig. 13(b)]. it should be noticed that the diode isolation can be further improved if we apply reverse bias voltage on it for the off state instead of 0 v. however, applying a separate reverse voltage besides the forward voltage needs a second voltage source, thus leading to increased system complexity and cost. the dc bias lines in fig. 12 are designed by using a quarter wavelength transformer (ldc = λg/4) and an open ended fan shape stub. those are on the other side of the polarizer substrate and apply the dc voltage on the p i n diodes. a dc bias capacitor cdc is used to avoid short circuiting.

simulation and measurement results of s11 of the proposed reconfigurable polarizer are shown in fig. 14. as expected, when only one of the diodes is on, there are two close resonance frequencies and the radiated fields are circular. when both diodes are on or off, both resonance frequencies occur at the same frequency, since both slots have the same electrical length. in this case, the radiated field is linear and it is parallel to the broader side of the waveguide [see fig. 1(b)]. the simulated results of s11 when only one diode is on and the other is off are the same, while the corresponding measured results show a small difference that is due to the fabrication tolerances and different actual diodes characteristics.

the axrs for different diodes' states are shown in fig. 15. as can be seen, rh/lhcp and linear polarization are achieved by changing the diodes bias voltages. the measured results show that two peaks occur at slightly different frequencies is because that cause the measured curves look wider. it of the interaction of p i n diodes and their influence on the fig. 16. normalized radiation patterns of (a) zx and (b) yz planes for the rhcp (diode1: on; diode2: off), (c) zx and (d) yz planes for the lhcp (diode1: off; diode2: on), (e) zx and (f) yz planes for the lp (diode1: on; diode2: on), and (g) zx and (h) yz planes for the lp (diode1: off; diode2 : off). the simulation result (s) frequency and the measurement result (m) frequency are 2.65 ghz. good agreement. the measured axr values for linear polarzation when both diodes are on and off are 30 and 26 db, respectively. the normalized radiation pattern of the proposed reconfigurable antenna for each state in two normal planes xz and zy (see fig. 7) is shown in fig. 16. the antenna radiation efficiency for rhcp and lhcp (only one of the diodes in on) is 95%, which is 2% less than the nonreconfigurable antenna of fig. 5(a) due to the losses introduced by the diodes. in the linear polarization modes, the radiation efficiencies are around 93% and 97% when both diodes are on and off, respectively. finally, by using a circular horn antenna, higher directivity can be obtained.

we introduced a novel reconfigurable polarizer that can be integrated with open ended or horn waveguide antennas to provide lh/rh circular and linear (horizontal) polarization.

rwgs are frequently used, for example, in high gain horn antennas, as elements of antenna arrays and as feeds of reflector antennas. hence, a possible application is modifying an already existing system that contains rwg antennas and upgrading it to an rpa system. the proposed reconfigurable polarizer consists of a cross shape slot with a cross shape paraitic trace to lower the resonance frequency and miniaturize the structure. two p i n diodes are placed near the end of each slot and they act as rf switches to alter the effective length of the slots. slots with the same and different lengths radiate cp and linear polarization, respectively. thus, lhcp or rhcp can be obtained when only one of the diodes is on. if both diodes are off or on, linear polarization is obtained due to having the same slot effective length. the polarizer needs only a single valued dc power supply with low dc power consumption.

the future work will include the application of this recon

figurable polarizer to arrays of rwg antennas.

r. e. collin, foundations for microwave engineering. hoboken, nj,

n. ortiz et al., "complementary split ring resonator

m. barbuto, f. bilotti, and a. toscano, "novel waveguide components resonators," photon. 284 290,

based on complementary electrically small no. nanostruct. fundam. 2014. appl., vol. 12, 4, pp.