yalin e. sagduyu, senior member, ieee, yi shi, senior member, ieee, allen b. mackenzie, senior member, ieee, and y. thomas hou fellow, ieee ieee transactions on wireless communications, vol. ??, no. ?, month 2018

abstract—there are different forms of uncertainty in satelite communications, including cognitive interferers, channel conditions, packet traffic, and spectrum occupancy of users across channels. in addition, delay (such as propagation delay observed over satellite links) increases spectrum uncertainty and makes spectrum sensing and spectrum access two challenging tasks. to address such challenges, this paper presents a regret minimization solution for primary user (pu) and secondary user (su) spectrum access to satellite resources in the presence of cognitive interferers. this robust game theoretic solution supports hierarchical spectrum sharing and dynamic spectrum access over multiple channels. users select channels for data transmission and perform power control to optimize individual utility functions that are random due to different forms of uncertainty. the proposed game engine based on regret minimization framework provides a low complexity and fast solution compared to traitional game solutions based on expected utility maximization. detailed numerical results evaluate throughput and delay of pus and sus in the presence of cognitive interferers and compare the robust game theory enabled approach with two benchmark schemes (with and without knowledge on channel availability). to support controllable and repeatable test and evaluation with real radios, an emulation testbed is built with softwareefined radios connected with a network channel emulator that generates channel, mobility, and interference effects for satellite communications. gnu radio modules are developed for cognitive network functionalities and run on usrp n210 radios that represent su, pu, interferer and satellite nodes. emulation tests validate the effectiveness of the proposed solution under real radio effects.

index terms—dynamic spectrum access; hierarchical specrum sharing; cognitive radio; game theory; regret minimizaion; uncertainty; satellite communications, gnu radio, usrp, emulation; testbed.

t his paper considers the problem of hierarchical spectrum sharing in satellite communications subject to cognitive

manuscript received july 29, 2016; revised feb. 8, 2017, june 29, 2017, sept. 22, 2017, and dec. 1, 2017; accepted feb. 27, 2018. this material is based upon work supported by usaf/afrl under contract fa9453 13 0155, nsf under grants 1642873, 1617634, and 1343222. any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the air force. the associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was s. mukherjee.

y.e. sagduyu and y. shi are with intelligent automation inc., rockville,

a.b. mackenzie and y.t. hou are with virginia tech, blacksburg, va

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available interferers (such as jammers). primary users (pus) have dedcated channels and secondary users (sus) opportunistically access available channels, while cognitive interferers attempt to disrupt communications. the focus is on uplink transmisions from pus or sus to a receiver which may represent a satellite in a satellite communication (satcom) system.

there are potential delays in acknowledgments following data transmissions such as those caused by the propagation delays over satellite links . by accounting for delay effects on uncertainty, we design the game engine for each type of user (pus, sus and cognitive interferers) as follows.

pu: we define a policy space to make decisions on idle channel activation, available channel selection for transmissions, and reservation. we also define a utility function for pus to consider reward for successful transissions and cost for delay, activation, and reservation. • su: we define a policy space to make decisions on idle channel request. we also define a utility function for sus, which considers both reward for successful transmissions and cost for delay and activation.

cognitive interferer: we define a policy space to make jamming decisions. the utility of an interferer is a function of interfered packets.

we apply regret minimization framework as a lowomplexity and fast alternative to expected utility maximization , in the form of a bayesian game that has been exensively used for wireless communications under interfering effects . in this regret minimization framework, the utility for each type of users is a random function, since both reward for successful transmissions and cost due to delay, channel activation and channel reservation are random variables. accounting for random utility functions, we apply regret minimization techniques to choose a policy randomly based on its regret, which is the additional cost due to not using the optimal policy. we present a decision policy for each type of user, i.e., pu, su, and cognitive interferer, each with its own policy space and utility. each user adopts delay aware spectrum sensing (by accounting for channel memory due to delay) to identify idle or busy channels, selects channels and performs power control.

we first study performance in simulation and then in testbed with real radios. simulation results first show the effects of spectrum sensing on throughput and delay. then simulation results are presented to compare regret minimization solution with an ideal (genie based) policy and a random policy in which users have perfect or no knowledge on channel avail 1

to support controllable and repeatable test and evaluation with real radios, we built an emulation testbed with softwareefined radios connected with a network channel emulator that generates channel, mobility, and interference effects for satellite communications. we modularized the entire system architecture into gnu radio modules that can be flexibly congured and integrated into our practical usrp based testbed. our testbed implementation uses radio frequency network emulator simulator tool, rfnest , to emulate channels for satellite ground station communications (including channel attenuation and delay) among usrp n210 radios that repreent pu, su, interferer, and satellite nodes. emulation tests demonstrate the performance of the proposed approach under real radio effects.

previous works have applied regret minimization to cogitive networks at different levels (see for a survey). the focus of , was on coexistence between macrocell and femtocell tiers, whereas we consider dynamic spectrum access (dsa) with pus, sus, and interferers. , solved a one shot scheduling problem of enabling the maximum number of concurrent transmissions under different interference models. instead, we address a general schedulng problem for dsa where different transmissions can be scheduled in different time slots. considered pu and su transmissions only. we also consider the impact of interferers. studied a network of pus, sus and interferers but focused on the sensing problem. we consider both sensing and spectrum access for throughput maximization. in addition, we build a testbed with real radios to evaluate our solution.

the rest of the paper is organized as follows. section ii provides the system model, including the network setting, the pu, su, and cognitive interferer models and spectrum sensing. section iii presents the game engine based on regret minimizaion for each type of node. section iv provides simulation results on the performance evaluation of the developed game engine compared to different alternatives. section v presents the gnu radio module implementation, usrp testbed, and emulation test results. finally, section vi concludes the paper.

we consider an uplink communication scenario with three types of nodes: pus, sus, and cognitive interferers. we model their behavior in this section.

each pu has random packet arrivals, i.e., each packet may arrive with certain probability parv for every time slot. we assume that one packet has bpkt bits. a pu maintains a queue for data that is awaiting transmission.

each pu has a number of assigned channels and exchanges control information with the receiver for handshaking before its data transmission. a pu performs handshaking with the receiver before transmission. due to round trip delay, a channel cannot be available immediately after the pu sends a request to send (rts). thus, channels are classified as idle (to be activated), activation pending, and available. once fig. 1. a sample of pu activities on one channel.

some channels are available to a pu and it has queued data, it will allocate power on some of its available channels to transmit data to the receiver. the receiver will send an acknowledge (ack) or negative acknowledgement (nak) to confirm the received data , , along with channel status. if the received signal to interference plus noise ratio (sinr) is less than some threshold sinrmin, then this channel is likely being interfered and a nak is generated. if a pu has used some channels to successfully transmit data, these channels can be used again, and the pu already has knowledge on channel status. otherwise, channel status can be obtained during handshaking. no matter which case, channel status information is delayed by round trip time (rtt). for example, rtt is 2 × 3.59×107 3×108 = 0.239 sec for a general geo receiver system at an altitude of 35,900 km. pus need to decide which idle channels should be activated, which available channels should be used for transmissions, and which available channels should be reserved for future transmissions.

fig. 1 shows a sample of pu activities on one channel. at the beginning, there is a packet arrival. then the pu performs the handshaking scheme before transmitting this packet. when the pu finishes the transmission of the first packet, it moves the first packet to a temporary queue. since the second packet already arrived, the pu transmits the second packet right after it finishes the transmission of the first packet. when the pu finishes the transmission of the second packet, it moves the second packet to a temporary queue. now the pu's queue is empty and thus it is idle. the next event is that the ack for the first packet is received. ack, nak, and handshaking can be piggybacked on synchronization packets over return links, using the existing forward and return links for synchronization between a receiver and transmitter. the pu can remove the first packet from the temporary queue and update its knowledge on channel status. the next event is that the third packet arrives. the pu changes from idle to transmission mode and performs a handshaking. during the entire process, it is possible that the pu receives a nak (e.g., for the fifth packet). in this case, the corresponding packet should be moved from the temporary queue to the pu's queue and will be transmitted again.

in addition to design possibility in this example, we consider

more challenging cases in algorithm design, including

1) a pu may have multiple assigned channels, 2) handshaking/nak may indicate that some channels are interfered and at a particular time, not all assigned channels are available. each su looks for opportunistic access to pu channels and aims to regulate its admission of new packets to a rate that can actually be supported. the opportunistic access requires that an su senses some channels, finds idle channels (not in use by pus), and then uses these idle channels for transmission. an su can sense a pu or another su transmission by observing ack/nak. note that an su can receive ack/nak to another user if it is close to that user due to the large coverage of a satellite. when a control packet is sensed on one channel, this channel is busy unless it was used by a pu and this pu just emptied its queue. thus, an su may simply assume that ack/nak indicates a busy channel.

in addition, an su can sense a pu/su transmission either directly or by sensing sidelobes, e.g., a pu/su ground transitter uses a directional antenna to communicate with the receiver. although the majority of the power is transmitted in the main lobe towards the receiver, there is some power in sidelobes. an su in a sidelobe can detect channel busy/idle status. such information may not always be available, e.g., an su is not in a sidelobe, and may have error, since power in sidelobe is much less than interference. thus, an su uses such information as an auxiliary approach to improve the results by sensing ack/nak. any spectrum sensing method, such as energy detection, can be used.

once some channels are identified as available, an su performs handshaking before its transmissions. note that if requests from both the pu and an su are received, the receiver will send a clear to send (cts) to the pu. since there are various uncertainties in the system, e.g., uncertainty due the actual channel condition is to delayed channel status, unknown. the receiver will send an ack/nak to confirm the received data, along with channel status. each ack/nak is delayed by rtt. sus need to decide which idle channels should be requested.

there are two cases of nak for su transmissions. the first case is the same as the nak for pu transmissions i.e., a nak is generated when the received sinr is less than a threshold sinrmin. this case may indicate an interfered channel. the second case is that the receiver has received a pu handshaking request and thus terminates su transmissions.

fig. 2 shows a sample of su activities on one channel. at the beginning, su performs sensing, finds an available channel, performs handshaking and then transmits its data. since an su always has data to transmit, it transmits the second packet right after it finishes the transmission of the first packet.

1) when an ack is received, the su knows that the current channel is still available and updates channel status. 2) when a nak is received, the su knows that the current channel has become unavailable.

1) a su can sense multiple channels and transmit on multiple available channels,

2) sensing/handshaking/nak may indicate that some chan

nels are unavailable.

c. cognitive interferer model

an interferer can sense the spectrum to identify whether a channel is busy. it can also measure the ack/nak power from the receiver and estimate channel gain from the receiver to itself, where the receiver transmit power psat is known. then assumes that channel gain from a nearby ground it transmitter to the receiver is similar. such information may not be always available, since there is an ack only if there was a transmission. moreover, such information is delayed by rtt. an interferer can assume a noise level at the receiver but interference at the receiver cannot be obtained. therefore, the interferer can identify channel idle/busy status, have delayed channel gain, and estimate noise. note that the case of unlimted jamming capability yields a trivial solution of jamming all channels. thus, we assume that each interferer has limited capability in terms of the number of jammed channels. then an interferer needs to selectively jam a subset of busy channels. once a set of busy channels is selected, the interferer needs to distribute its interference power on these channels. initially, the interferer performs sensing, finds a busy channel, and then interferes with this channel. then it needs to perform sensing again to identify busy channels.

1) an interferer can sense multiple channels and interfere with multiple busy channels,

2) sensing may indicate that some channels are idle and thus at a particular time not all sensed channels should be interfered,

3) an interferer needs to distribute its interference power on multiple busy channels.

d. delay aware spectrum sensing

both sus and interferers need to perform spectrum sensing. there are two possible approaches to sense a channel. sus and interferers can sense ack/nak to identify a busy channel. such a sensing approach can provide accurate results but results are delayed due to long satellite link propagation delays. in addition, although satellite uplink communications use directional antennas, a small portion energy is in side beams and thus can be sensed by sus and interferers. such a sensing approach can provide timely results but the results may not be accurate due to limited energy in side beams. since it is very challenging to reliably predict busy/idle channel status by using only one sensing result, we use a weighted energy detection with sliding window for spectrum detection by sus and interferers. this algorithm captures correlated transmision activities over time and delayed transmission feedback. 3

denote by et and τt the energy measurement and the energy detection threshold at time t. denote by ht ∈ {0, 1} the indicator that the channel is idle (0) or busy (1) at time t, and by ˆht the estimate of ht. we consider the following binary hypothesis test:

where t is the sliding window length and ωt−k are the weights applied to energy et−k. the weights can be continuously updated by computing the correlation probabilities within the sliding windows. for example, for window length t = 2, we have ωt−1 = (p0|0 + p1|1) × 0.5 and ωt = 1 − ωt−1, where pi|j is the moving average of likelihood that ht−∆−1 = i and ht−∆ = j, where ∆ is round trip delay and is measured by the number of time slots.

note that a large threshold yields a small false alarm probaility at the expense of a large misdetection probability, while a small threshold yields a small misdirection probability at the expense of a large false alarm probability. thus, it is important to dynamically adjust the threshold to a suitable value. using delayed acknowledgments, the threshold is updated as follows:

the confidence level ˆp (ht = i) is computed for the transission decision process based on current hypothesis result:

the sensing results are used as input to the game engine. when a pu (or an su) needs to select channels for transmision, it will select channels with high idle probability. on the other hand, when an interferer needs to select some channels to jam, it will select channels with high busy probability.

iii. game engine based on regret minimization

we develop different policies for pus, sus and interferers as regret minimization strategies under the regret minimization framework , , , where both reward (function of random number of transmitted packets) and cost (function of random policy) are random functions.

we consider a time slotted system, where each pu is assigned n channels. there are np u pus and thus a total of n × np u channels. there are nsu sus and nj interferers. each su can sense and use any idle channel (not used by the corresponding pu and other sus) to transmit data while each interferer can sense and interfere with any busy channel (used by pu/su). for simplicity, we assume that a packet can be transmitted in one slot. the unique challenge of satellite communications is the large propagation delay. we assume that the rtt between a ground station and the receiver is r slots. thus, data transmissions in slot t are acknowledged in slot t + r. similarly, it takes r slots to activate an idle channel. that is, when a user wants to activate a channel, it sends an activation request to the receiver in slot t, receives a response in slot t + r and can begin transmitting on the channel in slot t + r + 1. in every slot, a user (a pu or an su) decides which subset of channels to use. data can be sent on active channels immediately. as noted above, inactive channels that a user decides to activate in slot t can be used for data transmission beginning in slot t + r + 1.

1) pu's state, action, and utility: we first identify how to describe pu state. the complete state for the pu in slot t consists of a state for each channel and the state of each packet in the pu's queue. usually a channel may be either active (in which case the pu can send data on it in slot t) or idle (in which case the pu can request to activate it). however, due to the large delay to activate a channel, the above two cases cannot fully capture all channel states. thus, we also introduce r activation stages, where stage k, k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , r}, means that the pu requested to activate this channel in slot t − k. denote the number of channels in each state in slot 1, . . . , nt t as (nt r+1), where nt 0, nt 0 is the number of idle channels, nt k is the number of channels in activation stage k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , r}, and nt r+1 is the number of active channels. similarly, a complete state for each pu packet would indiate the "waiting stage" of any unacknowledged transmissions of the packet, since it takes r slots to learn the outcome of any transmission attempt. denote the number of packets in each state in slot t as (qt 1, . . . , qt 0 is the number of packets waiting for transmission and qt k is the number of packets in waiting stage k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , r}. a packet in waiting stage k in slot t was transmitted in slot t − k and an ack (or nak) is expected in slot t + r − k. thus, a complete pu state in slot t includes nt k for k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , r}. 0 ≥ at

based on the above pu actions, the evolution for the channel

and the evolution for the packet queue is specified by

(6) 0 is the number of new packet arrivals during slot t

we now model the utility function for a given pu action. in each time slot, the pu receives a reward of one unit for each packet successfully delivered. the pu pays a delay penalty of cdelay for each non transmitted packet in queue q0, where 0 < cdelay < 1. finally, the pu pays a cost crev for each reservation packet transmitted, where crev > 0. we assume a channel activation cost cact > 0. the introduction of cact is to prevent keeping all channels active, which will negatively impact sus. the utility is defined as rewards minus costs, and the pu wishes to maximize the average utility over time.

there is a subtle issue (caused by large delay on feedback) on which slot particular rewards and costs are credited to. for the objective of maximizing the average utility over time, this is not important, since the decision on which slot will not affect the objective. but, when it comes to regret minimization algorithms, this will make a significant difference. if the number of packets successfully acknowledged in slot t, f t is credited as the reward in that slot, then we end up with the awkward situation in which the reward in that slot is unconnected to the action taken in the slot, because it only depends on actions taken in slot t − r. the reward in slot t is taken to be the number of packets that are successfully transmitted in slot t, that is f t+r. thus, pu utility in slot t is 0)+ 0 − at

the expected utility maximization for the pu is

2) su's state, action, and utility: the complete state for an su in slot t consists of the number of channels in each state as (n0, n1, . . . , nr, nr+1) and the number of packets in each state as (q0, q1, . . . , qr). the set of actions available to an su is to decide the number of the idle channels to activate aact and the number of packets to transmit on each of the active channels. if q0 ≥ nr+1, nr+1, packets in state 0 are transmitted. otherwise, new packets are sent on nr+1 − q0 channels. the feedback f t received by an su in slot t is the number of packets that succeeded in slot t − r. note that we r = nt−r must have f t ∈ {0, . . . , qt the evolution for the channel states is specified by (8) where (·)∗ refers to the best argument that maximizes the expected utility.

the evolution for the packet queue is specified by r+1)+ + qt cdelay and a channel activation cost cact. we assume that an su wishes to maximize the average slot utility over time. su utility in slot t is

the su's decision is at cdelay, cact, q0 to be n0 (as a function of nt the su is act. the parameters include r, n · np u , k (usually assumed k = 0 for k = 1, . . . , r + 1) and f t+r r+1). the expected utility maximization for k (usually assumed to be 0), n0

3) interferer's state, action, and utility: there are cognitive interferers that wish to interfere with the pu/su's uplink transmissions. we assume that an interferer is power limited and is only able to interfere with j channels in each slot. there are several possible ways to model the capability of an interferer. we assume that 1) an interferer can receive ack/nak on all channels and 2) an interferer cannot receive channel activation responses from the receiver. ideally, all downlink information from the receiver (including channel activations, acknowledgements, negative acknowledgements, etc.) would be securely encrypted. then an interferer could do little other than select j channels at random to interfere in each slot. the end effect of this from the pu's point of view would be to increase the apparent i.i.d. failure rate of the system, but otherwise the resulting system would be indistinguishable from the system discussed previously. thus, we make the first assumption that an interferer can receive ack/nak on all channels, i.e., in slot t+ r this interferer learns if each channel has a success/failure in transmission, or is idle in slot t. we make the second assumption that an interferer cannot receive channel activation responses from the receiver. otherwise, an interferer could perfectly track the pu's active channel set and interfere with j of those channels in each slot. this would not present a particularly interesting problem due to the following solution. the pu would keep j extra channels active and either accept the additional packet losses or use a (k − j) out of k code to preserve k − j successful transmissions.

an interferer's utility is based upon the number of packets successfully interfered, which in turn depends on ct, the set of channels selected at time t. an interferer counts any nak recorded on a channel for a slot that it attempted to interfere as a success, although in some cases with our i.i.d. failure model a slot transmission might have failed even absent interferers. we assume that interfering is always successful. denote ¯f t as the number of nak at time t. then the interferer utility is i = ¯f t+r . ut

the expected utility maximization for the interferer is

the expected utility maximization problems (i.e., (8), (12), (13)) for the system that we have described is a stochastic game with partial observability. namely, the system evolves stochastically and the players cannot observe the entire state, but only various signals associated with the state. such a game 5

(13) is the multi player analog of a partially observable markov decision process (pomdp) . therefore, expected utility maximization would have very high complexity and a tractable solution to compute an equilibrium is unknown. instead, regret minimization provides a fast and low complexity solution of random policy updates (without solving an optimization problem explicitly). in general, regret minimization strategies are known to converge to approximate correlated equilibria . moreover, these equilibria have significantly better social welfare properties than conventional nash equilibria, which approaches the maximum expected utility . therefore, we apply regret minimization to provide a fast and low complexity solution in the following subsections.

1) pu strategy: pus apply certain strategy to decide their actions. pu strategy consists of two rules, an activation rule and a deactivation rule.

activation rule: on the basis of the current queue state and channel state, compute the number of channels that could definitely be used in slot t + r + 1 if they were activated now (i.e., assuming no additional arrivals or failed packets) based on (5) and (6). call this number nt need, which is calculated as follows. a pu sets at act = nt 0. the pu uses (5) and (6) to calculate nt+i r+1 −

in slot t, activate enough channels to ensure that there will be at least nneed + lact active channels in slot t + r + 1 subject to the number of available channels. call the parameter lact the activation level of the algorithm. • deactivation rule: deactivate idle channels if this will not cause the number of active channels to drop below lmaint (the maintenance level of the algorithm).

note that both parameters lact and lmaint take values from the set {0, 1, . . . , n}. based on these two parameters, we can determine pu action (in terms of aact and axmit) as follows. denote nt need + lact, n}, which is the number target > nt of active channels that we want to have. if nt r+1, xmit = nt act = nt then at r+1. otherwise, at act = 0 and at target, lmaint}. some special cases are 1) if lmaint = n, the pu keeps all channels active at all times, and 2) if lact = lmaint = 0, the pu uses k channels only if it has k packets to transmit on these k channels (i.e., the conservative algorithm). an algorithm with positive values of the two parameters would behave in a way that seems intuitively sensible: it would activate some more channels than were currently "needed", in anticipation of new packet arrivals and failures, and it might keep some channels active if they were expected to be needed.

2) regret minimization: regret minimization is applied to determine pu strategy parameters lact and lmaint. we note to the regret minimization approach is generally not that simply choose the best set of parameter values based on 1. a pu initializes a (n + 1) × (n + 1) weight matrix w , where i,j = 1.

let t = k − r. note that the outcomes for slot t are known. the pu first evaluates and finds the best at that maximize (7). for every (i, j), the pu calculates the additional loss (or regret value) lt lact = i and lmaint = j by (5), (6), and (7). the weight table is then updated as wk where η (typically ≪ 1/2) is the learning rate in the polynomial weights algorithm . the pu computes w k = act and at

i,j that would have resulted from using

the pu selects the (lact, lmaint) with a probability distribution i,j = wk pk i,j /w k.

fig. 3. pu regret minimization algorithm.

past evaluation. rather, the retrospective performance with different possible sets of parameters can be used to choose a probability distribution over algorithm parameters, e.g., using the polynomial weights algorithm . the idea is to weight the distribution towards the best performing values, but still have some diversity of action. the actual behavior chosen in each slot can then be determined by the algorithm using parameters drawn from the computed distribution. this stochastic selecion has some advantages in a non strategic environment, as it limits regret by broadening the action support, but it will have further advantages when play becomes strategic (i.e., when an interferer is introduced) as the randomization will make the pu's play less predictable by the interferer.

the set of all possible (lact, lmaint) values is the pu policy

space. the steps of regret minimization are:

1) a pu maintains a weight table of size (n + 1) × (n + 1), where cell (i, j) is associated with the weight of lact = i and lmaint = j. initially, let this table be filled with values w0 i,j = 1. that is, each set of parameter values will be chosen randomly with equal probability.

2) when the outcomes for slot t are known in slot t+r, the pu first evaluates what the genie aided algorithm would have done in slot t (i.e., how many channels it would have activated or deactivated) by (7).

3) any deviation from this strategy will result in additional costs crev, cdelay and cact beyond those charged to the genie aided algorithm. for every cell (i, j) in the weight table, the pu calculates the additional loss that would have resulted from using the algorithm with lact = i and lmaint = j in that slot by (5), (6), and (7). call this loss or regret value lt+r i,j .

where η is the learning rate in the polynomial weights algorithm . typically, η ≪ 1/2 and may be adaptive. it should be chosen to ensure positive weights.

5) to decide how many channels to activate or deactivate in slot t + r + 1, the pu computes

(15) and then selects the (lact, lmaint) to use with a probaility distribution

the pu learns the best parameters to reduce its regret with respect to the genie aided algorithm (see fig. 3). convergence of polynomial weights algorithm has been shown in .

3) pu power allocation: after a pu selects channels, it will allocate its total transmit power on these channels such that the overall expected throughput can be maximized. in particular, its sensing module will determine the minimum equivalent isotropically radiated power (eirp) on each channel to achieve target sinr, which in turn determines the minimum required power consumed on a channel. then there are two cases.

the total required power on these selected channels is more than its total power, which means that some channels with large required power should not be used. • the total required power on these selected channels is less than its total power. thus, it can allocate more power on each channel. to improve sinr on all channels, it can allocate power proportional to minimum required power.

sus also apply regret minimization to develop a per channel strategy. in particular, by observing past histories an su can estimate the expected regret associated with each possible action (attempt to activate or not) for each channel that it does not currently possess in each time slot. based on the estimation of expected regret associated with each action, the su will decide an activation probability for each channel. this process is similar to pu strategy. after an su selects channels, it will allocate its total transmit power on these channels. this process is again similar to pu power allocation.

1) su strategy: sus apply certain strategy to decide their actions, which consists of an activation rule: on the basis of the current queue state and channel state, compute the number of channels that could definitely be used in slot t+r+1 if they were activated now (i.e., assuming no additional arrivals or failed packets) based on (9) and (10). call this number nt need, which can be calculated by a similar approach as that for pus. in slot t, activate enough channels to ensure that there will be at least nneed + lact active channels in slot t + r + 1 subject to the number of available channels. call the parameter lact the activation level of the algorithm. based on this parameter, we can determine su action (in terms of at act) as follows. denote nt need + lact, n}, which is the number of active channels that we want to have. if nt r+1, then at i = 1. 7

1. an su initializes a weight vector of size (n · np u + 1), where i = 1.

let t = k − r. note that the outcomes for slot t are known. the su first evaluates what the genie aided algorithm would have done in slot t (i.e., how many channels it would have activated or deactivated) by (11). for every i, the su calculates the additional loss (or regret value) lt i that would have resulted from using lact = i by (9), (10), and (11). i = wk−1 the weight vector is then updated as wk where η is the learning rate. the su computes w k = 6.

the su selects the lact with a distribution pk

3) for every element i in the weight vector, the su calcuates the additional loss that would have resulted from using the algorithm with lact = i in that slot by (9), (10), and (11). call this loss or regret value lt+r i

4) the weight vector is then updated as

where η is the learning rate.

and then selects the lact distribution to use with a probability

fig. 4 shows the pseudocode of regret minimization at an su. 3) su power allocation: after an su selects channels, it will allocate its total transmit power on these channels such that the overall expected throughput can be maximized. the power allocation strategy is the same as that for pu.

d. interferer's game solution

for slots more than r slots old, an interferer knows whether or not it was interfered and whether the outcome was ack, nak, or idle. an interferer would regret interfering on any idle channel and could evaluate various alternative strategies easily in retrospect. for the outcome of the m most recent slots (referring to transmission in slots (t − r − m, t − r − m + 1, . . . , t−r−1)), an interferer is able to estimate the probability pt c that, absent interfering, there will be a successful pu/su transmission on channel c in slot t. to minimize regret, an interferer can choose the j best channels (with j largest pt c values) to interfere with and allocate the same power on these channels. the parameter m can be adjusted to optimize the tradeoff between the accuracy of the resulting estimates and the amount of time required to learn the estimates. note that always choosing the best j channels to interfere with may be too predictable for pus and sus. instead, an interferer can choose j channels randomly based on pt

c values. we now analyze complexity in each slot. • pu complexity: the evolution of channel states and packet queue in (5) and (6) has a constant complexity for each k. the total complexity for evolution is o(r). the pu strategy is determined by lact and lmaint, both taking values from the set {0, 1, · · · , n}. the utility for each at act (determined by lact and lmaint) is calculated by (7) with a constant complexity. then the total complexity to calculate utilities under all strategies is o(n2). the pu then calculates regret, updates the weight table by step 7 in fig. 3, and computes a probability distribution by steps 8 and 9 of fig. 3, the complexity of these steps is o(n2). finally, the pu randomly chooses a strategy with o(1) complexity. the overall complexity in a time slot is o(n2 + r).

su complexity: the analysis on su complexity is similar to pu complexity. the difference is that su strategy is determined by lact, which takes values from the set {0, 1, · · · , n · np u }. as a result, the complexity to calcuate utilities under all strategies is o(n · np u ). the total complexity to calculate regret, update the weight vector, and compute a probability distribution is o(n·np u ). the overall complexity in a time slot is o(n · np u + r). • interferer complexity: an interferer needs to track the probability of success of pu/su transmissions for each of the n · np u channels over the most current m time slots. given that m is a small constant, the complexity is o(n·np u ). then interferer randomly chooses j channels based on these probabilities. the complexity is o(j). the overall complexity in a time slot is o(n · np u + j). iv. performance evaluation via simulations

this section provides simulation results on performance

study. testbed results will be presented in the next section.

for numerical results, we consider a general geo receiver system at an altitude of 35,900 km operating at x band or ka band . we assume channels each with 2.6 mhz bandwidth. then we compute noise, path loss, antenna gain and general received power characteristics of the ground nodeatellite communications .

where k is boltzmann's constant (k = 1.39 × 10−23 j/k = −228.6 dbw/k/hz), t is the physical temperature of source in kelvin degrees, and w is the bandwidth in hz. path loss. the free space path loss is given by

where r is the distance between the ground transmitter and the receiver and λ is the wavelength (in meters) at the frequency of operation. we assume r = 35,900km (by ignoring elevation angle effects). wavelength λ is approximately 0.0375m for xand and 0.01m for ka band. therefore, the free space path loss becomes lp = 201.6db for x band and lp = 213db for ka band. in addition, there will be some atmospheric loss (e.g., 2 db), clear air attenuation (e.g., 0.7db), and rain attenuation (e.g., 6db for 0.01% of the year). suppose all these losses are summed to la, which needs to be learned in the process of channel estimation.

antenna gain. the antenna gain can be expressed as

where d is the antenna diameter (assumed to be 2m for receiver and 5m for earth station), λ is the wavelength (in meters) at the frequency of operation (0.0375m for x band and 0.01m for ka band) and ea is the efficiency of antenna aperture (e.g., 68%). the transmit antenna gain is then comuted as gt = 50.8 db for x band and as gt = 62.3 db for ka band. receiver antenna gain can be computed similarly. the receive antenna gain is then gr = 42.8db for x band and as gr = 54.3 db for ka band.

received signal power the received signal power in db is

where transmit power at earth station is pt. the total signal received at receive antenna is then pr + pn. in addition, there will be interference coming from other users (sus and interferers), with total received interference power pi .

b. performance results

suppose there are one receiver (satellite), two pus, two sus and two interferers (ground stations).1 each pu has five assigned channels, while an su or an interferer can access all 10 channels. an interferer can interfere with at most three channels at the same time. the rtt, 0.239s, is divided into four slots. we assume that one channel can support transmission rate up to 100kb/s. the expected pu data arrival rate is 100kb/s.

we first tested the impact of spectrum sensing. with specrum sensing, a user can estimate busy (or idle) probability for each channel. during channel selection, a pu/su tries to select a channel with low busy probability, while an interferer tries to select a channel with high busy probability. with sensing results, it is expected that all users can make better decisions, i.e., pu/su may find good channels (with high idle probability) to transmit data while interferer may find good channels (with high busy probability) to interfere with. to study the impact of spectrum sensing, we compare results with and without spectrum sensing. for the latter case, we can simply set busy/idle probability as 0.5, which indicates that we do not have any knowledge on channel usage. under this assumption, the game engine is run again.

figure 5(a) and (b) shows the throughput of pus and sus with and without sensing algorithm, respectively. we also show the converged throughput performance for each user under these two scenarios in table i. in the game solution, the

1note that our algorithm does not have any limitation on the number of primary users, secondary users, and interferers. we use this particular setting in simulation and emulation because the number of nodes (real radios) available in emulation is limited. (22)

(23) fig. 5. throughput performance under different schemes.

table i throughput performance (in kb/s) under various scenarios.

throughput of pus is maximized. in particular, all data arrived at pu2 are transmitted. the throughput of sus improves without sensing results but the throughput of pus decreases, which indicates that sensing can protect pu transmissions.

figure 6(a) and (b) shows the delay of pus and sus with or without sensing algorithm. we also show the converged delay performance for each user under these two scenarios in table ii. without sensing, the delay of all users increases table ii delay performance (in ms) under various scenarios.

significantly, which indicates that sensing can identify idle channels and thus improve transmission success probabilities. we tested the integration of all node configurations with their corresponding regret minimization modules. we compare game solution with some benchmark cases. we consider the random case, where pus and sus have no knowledge of channel availability and thus both pus and sus transmit on randomly selected channels. in addition, we consider the following cases to determine the ideal case.

none: no user has perfect knowledge. this is the case that we considered so far.

pu: only pus have perfect knowledge of channel status (busy or idle).

su: only sus have perfect knowledge of channel status. • interferer: only interferers have perfect knowledge of channel status.

pu+su: pus and sus have perfect knowledge of channel status.

pu+interferer: pus and interferers have perfect knowldge of channel status.

pu+su+interferer: all users have perfect knowledge of channel status.

among these cases, we can easily find some cases are worse than others and thus are not ideal. for example, case pu is worse than case pu+su in terms of throughput. finally, we only have two cases left, pu+su and pu+su+interferer. under either of these cases, a pu knows which of its channels are idle. an su knows which channels are idle, not used by pus and can share these channels with other sus without collision. since sus want to maximize the throughput, all channels will be used. thus, interferers know that all channels are busy, i.e., interferers have perfect knowledge of channel status. case pu+su reduces to case pu+su+interferer. thus, we call pu+su+interferer as the ideal case, where each pu uses enough number of channels for its traffic, sus share remaining channels, and each interferer can interfere with certain number of channels. this ideal case provides a performance bound for any advanced schemes to be designed in future.

figure 5(a), (c), and table i show that a pu achieves the throughput similar to its arrival rate under both the game solution and the ideal case. that is, pus' performance is optimized under both solutions (achieving close values under numerical results shown in table i). on the other hand, sus' throughput under the game solution is much less than that under the ideal case, since there is no collision between sus under the ideal case. figure 5(a), (d), and table i show that su2 129.2 225.4 137 537.4 9

fig. 7. system architecture to implement the game solution.

pus achieve larger throughput with the game solution than under the random case while sus achieve smaller throughput with the game solution than under the random case. this is mainly caused by random channel selection, i.e., sus have more freedom to access channels but there is no protection for pu transmissions. figure 6(a), (c), and table ii show that a pu achieves smaller delay under the ideal case than under the game solution, since there is no collision with sus under the ideal case. on the other hand, a su has slightly larger delay under the ideal case than with the game solution, since there is limited number of channels allocated to each su. figure 6(a), (d), and table ii show that both pus have a smaller delay with the game solution than under the random case, since sus may interfere with pu transmissions in the random case, where sus may also interfere with each other.

in this section, we first describe the emulation testbed setup with real radios and then present testbed results to evaluate the performance of designed regret minimization solution.

we modularized the entire system architecture into gnu radio modules that can be flexibly configured and integrated into our practical usrp based testbed. fig. 7 shows the system architecture. the main gnu radio modules are:

sensor.py (spectrum sensing module): we developed and implemented the delay centric spectrum sensing module for pus, sus, and interferers. each node is equipped with a spectrum sensing module. this module is based on the algorithm described in section ii e. • optimizer.py (regret minimization module): we deeloped and implemented a game solution for distributed transmission (power and frequency selection) decisions of pus, sus, and interferers. each node is equipped with an optimizer module depending on their role (pu, su, or interferer). this module is based on the algorithm described in section iii.

transmitter.py and receiver.py (transceiver modules): each node in the network is equipped the fig. 8. emulation testbed with usrp n210 radios.

fig. 9. satellite emulation gui.

capability to transmit and receive packets and acks at the specified frequencies and power levels. each node is equipped with transmitter and receiver modules. usrp n210 radio waveform applies ofdm with symbol size 512 and 200 occupied carriers. the modulation scheme is bpsk. receiver power is in 0 31.5dbm and frequency band is in 2.31ghz 2.63ghz. the number of fft bins is 512 and the number of occupied fft bins is 200. there are 128 bits in the cyclic prefix.

these modules in gnu radio and extensively tested in our testbed with usrp n210 radios, shown in fig. 8. there are seven nodes including two pus, two sus, two interferers (ground stations), and one satellite. each node is represented by one of usrp radios. uplink transmission and downlink control channels are implemented. network channel emulator, rfnest , is used to digitally control uplink and downlink channels (attenuation and delay) between ground stations and satellite. we removed antennas of radios and connected them to rfnest via rf cables that carry rf signals. we implemented all

a control gui (shown in figure 9) is designed to accept satellite parameters as inputs and control the attenuation and delay in emulated satellite channels in real time. there are seven nodes in the testbed. the satellite is not shown on the gui. on the left side of the gui, there is a control panel to set a variety of parameters used to compute channel attenuation among the satellite, pus, sus, and interferers.

operating band: xr ka band. the carrier frequencies for x band and ka band are 8ghz and 30ghz, respecively. the values of the frequency can be easily adjusted to different applications.

antenna diameters: the diameters and the aperture efciency at satellite and ground stations are adjustable. we set typical values to be 2m for satellite, 5m for earth station, and 68% for the aperture efficiency. fig. 11. performance when pus use some static channels.

sidelobe degree: as the ground stations receive the sidelobe signals from each other, we also consider the sidelobe effect. since the sidelobe attenuation of dish antennas is very difficult to model, we adopt empirical results from realistic measurements on dish antennas. we design a sidelobe attenuation table, where the sidelobe attenuation is obtained for a given sidelobe degree.

weather effect: we also add the weather effect on satellite communications. in particular, the heavy rain effect will cause a typical value of 6db additional signal attenuation, whereas the clear air attenuation is set to be 0.7db. the channel effects are computed according to noise, pathloss, antenna gain and received signal power calculations from section iv a. rfnest reflects these channel effects on rf signals transmitted between radios. each pu, su or interferer performs spectrum sensing, utility maximization, transmission, reception or interference, and monitors its performance. we present experiment results obtained from the emulation testbed. figure 10 shows the throughput and delay perforance achieved in testbed evaluation for pu 1, pu 2, su 1 and su 2 as a function of time. unlike the results shown in section iv b, where transmission success/failure outcomes and channel sensing results are simulated, radios transmit over real channels in our testbed implementation and perform spectrum sensing on these transmissions to identify idle/busy channels. to show the impact of each design component, we compare results with a set of benchmarks:

1) pus always use some static channels. then sus will share the remaining channels. figure 11 shows the (b) delay performance. fig. 12. performance when pus and sus use some random channels. (a) throughput performance.

(b) delay performance.

fig. 13. performance when pus and sus do not sense channels.

achieved throughput and delay. there is no need to perform handoff before transmissions. as a result, su throughputs increase and su delays decrease.

2) both pus and sus randomly use some channels. figre 12 shows the achieved throughput and delay. there is no handoff before transmissions, i.e., collisions can happen between pu and su, or between two sus. without handoff, su throughputs increase. however, due to collision, su delays also increase.

3) no user performs spectrum sensing. figure 13 shows the achieved throughput and delay. pu throughputs increase and pu delays decrease, since interferers cannot find the best channels to jam. on the other hand, su throughputs decrease and su delays increase, since sus cannot find the best channels to transmit. vi. conclusion

we developed a game engine for spectrum access of pus and sus in the presence of cognitive interferers. the game engine is based on regret minimization for channel selection and power control. there exist several forms of uncertainty, including channel conditions, packet traffic and availability of users across channels, further aggravated by link delays that make spectrum efficient communication a challenging task. to better capture the dynamic nature of random utility functions, we applied regret minimization framework that provides a lowomplexity and fast solution compared to traditional game solutions based on expected utility maximization. a separate game engine was run at each node independently and a suitable policy was selected. this approach has low complexity and fast convergence speed. effects of spectrum sensing on throughput and delay were studied in both simulation and emulation testbed based on usrp n210 radios and network channel emulator, rfnest. results were also compared to the 11