xin zhang chunxiao jiang, senior member, ieee, chaoxing yan

abstract—a precoding scheme is proposed for the downlink of multieam satellite communication in the face of phase perturbations. in order to alleviate the signal to interference and noise ratio degradation induced by phase uncertainty and to minimize the transmission power consumpion, we formulated the beamforming problem as a chance constrained optimization. moreover, we provided a large deviation inequality aided conservative approximation for the chance constraints, followed by coneiving a tractable solution. our simulation results showed the accuracy and the efficiency of our proposed approximation algorithm compared to the benchmarks.

index terms—multibeam satellite, robust beamforming, phase pertur

the design of multicast multibeam satellite communication sysems has attracted much attention as a benefit of providing interactive broadband services to remote geographical areas at a high quality of service (qos) . multibeam joint beamforming is conducive to full frequency reuse and interference mitigation . in , christopoulos et al. demonstrated that a broadband multibeam satellite communiation system relying on a frame based transmit precoding (tpc) scheme had a higher throughput than the conventional four color freuency reuse configuration. meanwhile, zheng et al. proposed a generic optimization framework of linear precoding design for handling objective functions of data rate, which was close to the dirty paper codng under nonlinear power constraints in general multibeam satellite systems. furthermore, joroughi et al. investigated on board beamorming schemes in a joint multiple gateways architecture and showed

manuscript received may 13, 2018; revised november 10, 2018; accepted january 23, 2019. date of publication january 30, 2019; date of current version march 14, 2019. the work of l. hanzo was supported in part by the eprc projects ep/noo4558/1 and ep/po34284/1 of the royal society's grfc grant and in part by the european research council's advanced fellow grant quantcom. this work was also supported in part by the new strategic inustries development projects of shenzhen city (jcyj20170816151922176), in part by the young elite scientist sponsorship program by cast under grant 2016qnrc001. the review of this paper was coordinated by prof. h. h. nguyen. (corresponding author: chunxiao jiang.)

x. zhang, j. wang, and y. ren are with the department of electronic enineering, tsinghua university, beijing 100084, china (e mail:, zhangxin15@ mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; chinaeephd@gmail.com; reny@tsinghua.edu.cn).

c. jiang is with the tsinghua space center, tsinghua university, beijing 100084, china, and also with the key laboratory of eda, research instiute of tsinghua university in shenzhen, shenzhen 518057, china (e mail:, jchx@tsinghua.edu.cn).

c. yan is with the beijing research institute of telemetry, beijing 100076,

l. hanzo is with the school of electronics and computer science, university of southampton, southampton so17 1bj, u.k. (e mail:,lh@ecs.soton.ac.uk). that the number of gateways remained affordable even though the data demand increased. taking both system's performance and user's fairess into account , jiang et al. proposed a multimedia multicast beamforming scheme for improving the total system's capacity for the integrated terrestrial satellite networks.

however, satellite communication systems are characterized by a long round trip delay (rtd) and imperfect channel state information (csi) . to elaborate, v´azquez et al. demonstrated that the outated csi was expected to degrade the performance of precoded l band mobile multibeam satellite systems. naturally, the antenna weights are also affected by the imperfect csi, which leads to an inaccurate preoding matrix. hence, it is necessary to consider how the imperfect csi affects the precoder design. in order to counteract the signal tonterference and noise ratio (sinr) degradation caused by the csi esimation error, a robust beamforming has been proposed. there are two types of method invoked for describing the csi imperfections, namely the so called determined bounded model and the random model . specifically, wang et al. maximized the worst case received sinr by solving a max min optimization problem under a bounded uncerainty for multi input multi output (mimo) systems, which may not necessarily result in a better convex restrictive approximation. another one is constituted by the outage constrained problem, where the contraints are represented in the form of probability inequalities due to the characteristics of the csi error, which makes the computation of the antenna weights difficult and hence tackling this challenge is the main focus of our paper. to address this issue, a flexible outage probabilityonstrained robust beamforming mechanism is conceived in this paper. the magnitude of typical satellite channel models, such as line ofight (los) channel and rain fading channel , is determined only by the path attenuation, which usually varies slowly and is easy to estimate . therefore, we can assume that the amplitude is constant and known during the feedback interval. however, there is a signifcant variation in the channel phase component arising out of time varying phase perturbations and the high rtd will induce the outated csi . to qualify the service of satellite, li et al proposed a secure and robust beamforming framework for cognitive satelliteerrestrial networks (cstns) to minimize the transmit power under a stochastic model for the csi uncertainty . however, most of the existing contributions dedicated only limited attention to the phase perurbations induced by a number of impairments, such as the presence of the satellite's non linear transponders and conditioning filters, the channel fading and the imperfect synchronization caused by the osillator . moreover, since the phase noise increases as the center frequency increases, in particular for the frequency bands beyond kaand, the phase perturbation is an important factor in satellite commuications. given these phase perturbations, the probabilistic constraints are reformulated into random complex exponential forms which result in computational challenges. in this paper, we provide a conservaive approximation and a tractable solution with the following new contributions:

our proposed robust beamforming formulation minimizes the power, while satisfying the sinr constraints in the face of the phase perturbations. in order to solve the problem under the probabilistic constraints involving random complex exponential forms relying on the classic taylor series and large deviation inequality (ldi), we proposed a conservative approximation of the outage probability constraints to give a tractable solution. extensive simulations are conducted in order to show the effiiency of our proposed robust beamformer and to strike a comelling outage probability vs power consumption trade off.

notations: throughout this paper, we use boldfaced lowercase leters to represent column vectors and uppercase roman letters to repesent matrices. vec(a) represents the vector obtained by joining the column vectors of a. the notations sn and kn denote the sets of n order symmetric matrices and skewed symmetric matrices, respecively. furthermore, diag(a) represents a square diagonal matrix with the elements of the vector a constituting the main diagonal. the supercripts 't' and 'h' represent the transpose and the hermitian transpose, respectively, while tr(a) and (cid:2) represent the trace and the entry wise product respectively. additionally, ji (·) stands for the i th order bessel functions of the first kind, while (cid:3) · (cid:3) and (cid:3) · (cid:3)f represent the vector eulidean norm and matrix frobenius norm respectively. finally, pr {·} denotes the probability function.

the remainder of this paper is summarized as follows. in section ii, we describe the system model and formulate the multibeam beamorming problem considering phase perturbations. in section iii, an ldi approximation algorithm is proposed for minimizing the power consumption. in section iv, the power consumption and the outage probability are used for benchmarking the performance of our proosed model, followed by our conclusions in section v.

ii. multibeam beamforming considering phase perturbations

in this section, we consider a communication scenario, where terestrial users can be served by a gateway and a geosynchronous earth orbit (geo) satellite. to elaborate, the data packets are firstly precoded at the gateway and then sent to the geo satellite, as shown in fig. 1. the users receive the data relayed by the geo satellite.

although the channel between the gateway and the geo satellite is not perfect, the digital video broadcasting satellite (dvb s2) working group assumes that the downlink noise between the satellite and the users dominates the link's overall noise contributions. in line with this, we also assume a noiseless channel between the gateway and the geo satellite. in our model, the gateway is equipped with k antennas and has realistic imperfect csi. the geo satellite also has k antennas, forming a cluster of k adjacent beams directed to the ground. the total bandwidth is b. moreover, time division multiplexing is invoked. given the strict power constraint of the solar powered satellite, we formulate the multibeam beamforming as a power minimization problem. si (t) , i = 1, . . . , i be the initial signal requested by each user. then, the transmitted signal x (t) of the geo satellite precoded by the gateay is given by:

i = 1 where wi represents the precoding vector. hence, the signal received by the i th user is:

where ni (t) is the additive white gaussian noise (awgn) with vari . moreover, hi = (hi 1, . . . , hi k )t denotes the channel mance of τ 2 trix, where hi j = |hi j |ej θ i j is the sub channel function between the i th user and the j th antenna of geo satellite. then, the sinr of the i th user can be formulated as:

b. channel model

in our model, we have perfect amplitude information of |hi j |, but imperfect phase information, which means that ˆθi j = θi j − δi j , where ˆθi j represents the estimate of the phase and δi j is its estimation error. moreover, δi = (δi 1, . . . , δi k ) ∼ n (0, ci ), where ci is the correation matrix. hence, the estimate of the sub channel function can be formulated as ˆhi j = |hi j |ej ˆθ i j and we have:

where ei = (ej δ i 1 , . . . , ej δ i k )t represents the error vector. rainnduced fading is a typical phenomenon in satellite communications. the water vapor may typically results in a high phase rotation . furhermore, as to whether the rain induced phase error is dominant or not depends on how large the deviation of the estimation error is from its prediction, which is related both to the specific choice of the estimation method and to the particular value of the delay encountered in satellite communications and similarly on how dynamically the time varying space ground communication channel fluctuates. therefore, considerng the rain attenuation in the air to ground (a2g) channel, ˆhi can be formulated as:

moreover, f is the carrier frequency and d0 represents the distance beween the user and the geo satellite, the user's receiver gain is denoted by gr, i , while t represents the receiver's noise temperature and κ is boltzmann's constant. furthermore, 10− z 10 is the rain attenuation co = ej ˆθ i denotes efficient, where ln(z) ∼ n (μr a i n , σ2 the estimated phase of the i th user . additionally, bi in eq. (5) represents the beam gain, which can be approximated by : r a i n ) and φ

where gs , k is the transmitter gain of the k th beam on board. morever, we have uk = 2.07123 sin α k , i , and αk , i is the elevation angle sin α k , 3 db between the i th user and the k th beam center, while αk , 3 db denotes the half power angle. (1)

(7) to mitigate the cross beam interference and to improve power effiiency, we formulate the problem as the power minimization problem under sinr constraints. however, due to the existence of phase erors, the sinr constraints are represented in the form of probability inequalities, which ensure that statistically speaking the cross beam inerference remains sufficiently low. therefore, our robust beamforming problem can be formulated as:

where ηi is the lower bound of sinr required for satisfying the qos of the i th user and (cid:10)i is the failure probability. hence, each user's service is fulfilled with a probability of (1 − (cid:10)i ). noting wi hi , the inequality sinri ≥ hi = hh wi wh that |hh (cid:3) i i i ηi is equivalent to hh wi − i ( 1 i . according to j (cid:4)= i η i eq. (4), the left side can be reformulated as eh wi − (cid:3) zi ei . hence, we achieve the first contraint in (9). after these derivations, the optimization problem can be reformulated as:

where the positive semi definite matrix obeys wi = wi wh , while i zi (cid:2) diag(ˆhh wj )diag(ˆhi ). since the constraints are represented in the form of probability inequalities of complex exonential random variables, it is hard to check the associated feaibility. therefore, we convert the complex exponential probabilistic constraints into a quadratic form relying on a linear transformation. for the quadratic form probability inequalities, wang et al. pointed out that the feasibility decreases upon increasing the sinr η. moreover, the lti based method rates the feasibility to be much higher than that of the probabilistic second order cone program (socp) based method. below, we will first provide a near optimal solution of (9) relying on a relaxed chance constraint.

in this section, we first convert the problem in (9) into an sdp approximation problem via a taylor's expansion as well as an ldi. then, we solve the sdp relying on cvx and the gaussian randomization.

a. the approximation of complex exponential gaussian variables

first we use the quadratic gaussian variables to approximate the complex exponential gaussian variables via a taylor's expansion as well as linear mapping, which is embodied in lemma 1.

lemma 1: for complex exponential gaussian variables e = (ej δ 1 , . . . , ej δ i ), δi ∈ r, i = 1, . . . , i, then eh ze can be approxiately represented by its second order taylor's series as: where x ∈ sk is the real part of z, while y ∈ kk is the imaginary part of z. the functions f : rk×k → rk×k and g : rk ×k → rk constitute a linear mapping defined by: (cid:3)

the proof of lemma 1 can be provided with reference to . relying on lemma 1 in eq. (10), the constraint in (9) can be relaxed into a probability restriction associated with quadratic gaussian variables, in the form of: (cid:7)

< (cid:10)i , (13) where zi , [j, k ] represents the (j, k) th element of zi . in the following, we aim for eliminating the probability constraint, which may yield a quadratic constraint based on ldi. pr

b. the conservative approximation of probability inequality

. then we have:

the inequality in (15) grants us the freedom of selecting λ. note − ln (cid:10) when λν = − ln (cid:10). therefore, to minimize the value of ζ/d, which can be viewed as the least conservative approximation of the chance constraint, let λν = √

1 − (cid:10), 1), that can be found by which has one root in the range of ( the classic bisection method, since the left side of eq. (16) decreases monotonically when λ > 0. hence, the inequality in (15) reduces to − ln (cid:10)d. by introducing a pair of auxiliary variables x and y, ζ > 2 the outage constraint can be rewritten as: √

in our formulaj, k − τ 2, q = tion, let us introduce following definitions s = j, k 2 fc 1 c 1 2 g. therefore, reying on lemma 1 and lemma 2, the original optimization problem in (9) can be reformulated as:

due to the rank constraints, the problem is still non convex. motiated by the methodology in , in this section, we give the gaussian randomization algorithm for non convex problem (18), which is give in algorithm 1. first, by dropping the rank constraint, the optimization problem reduces to a convex sdp, which can be solved by cvx. if the rank of the solution ˆwi is 1, then the optimal wi can simply be found by eigen decomposition, i.e. 8. however, if the rank of ˆwi is higher than 1, we generate (w1, . . . , wi ) by using ˆw1, . . . , ˆwi as the covariance matrix of the gaussian distribution and scale them to satisfy the constraints, i.e. 2 ∼ 5, in each loop. moreover, l is the maximum times of gaussian sampling. fig. 2. total power consumption versus lower bound of sinr (η) parameterzed by outage probability ((cid:10)).

iv. simulation results

in our simulations, we benchmark the performance of our proposed algorithm in comparison to both a non robust method, as well as to the central limit theorem aided algorithm1 (denoted as clt) of and to the bernstein type inequality assisted algorithm2 (termed as bti) of .

in table i, we summarize the essential parameters of the simulations. we set the noise power τ 2 to 1 and the phase estimate φ to 1. the phase perturbations obey a zero mean gaussian distribution with the correlation matrix of c = σi, where σ = 5◦. the location of i = 5 users is generated randomly within the coverage of k = 5 beams. in the convex optimization, we relax the rank one constraint of (9) with the aid of gaussian randomization. we use the cvx tool to solve our sdp subproblem. the number of gaussian sampling is set to l = 10.

fig. 2 shows the minimum total power consumption required for satisfying the lower bound sinr constraint η ranging from 0 db to 5 db parameterized by the outage parameter values of (cid:10) = 0.01, (cid:10) = 0.05 and (cid:10) = 0.1, respectively. we disregard some values of the bti method and the clt method, which exceed 120 because of its extreme power consumption. we can conclude from fig. 2 that our proposed algorithm is the most energy efficient one, outperforming both the bti and clt, whilst meeting the sinr requirement.

in fig. 3, we use the classic monte carlo method for evaluating the actual outage probability versus the lower bound of the sinr η

1clt approximates the distribution of quadratic form of complex exponential gaussian random variables with a gaussian distribution relying on the central limit theorem.