the challenges involved in using analog retrodirective arrays for satellite commuications (satcom). the main technical issues surrounding the development of a retrodirective (self steering) satcom system are given and techniques for mitigating these issues are provided. detailed results are given for a prototype high performance circularly polarized retrodirective array architecture suitable for mounting on an unstabilized mobile platform. this paper conludes with practical retrodirective l band array results with the array used to acquire actual broadband satellite data signals from a commercial l band satellite system. received satellite signals as low as 130 dbm at the antenna elements are tracked. accurate self tracking occurs over the azimuth range of up to abstract—we present an in depth look at

index terms—antenna arrays, beam steering, phase conjuga

r etrodirective self steering antennas (rdas) have

the advantage of being able to automatically return a signal back in the direction along from which it originated . if a retrodirective array could react to fast signal variations with sufficient sensitivity then it could be used as a transceiver in a mobile satellite communications (satcom) system, or indeed as a self steered transceiver in other mobile applications where the requirement for automatic beam alignment between unstabilized platforms exists.

one application that could benefit from a retrodirective selfracking arrangement is satcom, particularly when applied to terrestrial mobile scenarios. a service that is currently availble globally at l band 1.5 ghz receive (rx) 1.6 ghz transmit (tx), is the inmarsat broadband global area network (bgan) . a study of the specification required for bgan reveals that major step changes of the type discussed in this paper are reuired if retrodirective array technology is to be considered as a viable option for this type of application.

the bgan ground terminal is required to transmit an effecive isotropic radiated power (eirp) of up to 50 dbm, and the signal level it receives, at a single low gain antenna element,

manuscript received december 04, 2014; revised august 27, 2015 and janary 18, 2016; accepted february 29, 2016. this work was supported by the european space agency (esa) under contract "self focusing retro reflective antennas for mobile terminal applications" ao/1 6168/09/nl/jd.

n. b. buchanan and v. f. fusco are with the institute of electronics, comunications and information technology (ecit), queen's university belfast, belfast bt3 9dt, u.k. (e mail: n.buchanan@ecit.qub.ac.uk; v.fusco@ecit.qub. ac.uk).

m. van der vorst is with the european space agency (esa), 2201 az no

ordwijk, the netherlands (e mail: maarten.van.der.vorst@esa.int).

color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online can be down to 130 dbm. the stringent specification on reeiver sensitivity rules out the majority of known retrodirective antenna array architectures, which fall into two broad classes, either the frequency offset van atta type or the phase conjuating pon type . in addition to lack of rx sensitivity these basic architectures are unable to deal with complex modulation scenarios where tx and rx phase modulated signals are reuired to operate in full duplex mode, e.g., for l band bgan 16 qam at 150 kb/s. the top level specification needed for l band bgan satcom is compared with what is currently achievable with reported self steered antennas, and with the new architectural approach presented in this paper in table i.

if retrodirective array technology is to be used in actual satcom systems, then a fresh look at the approach used for carrying out phase conjugation within the beam forming ciruitry is required. in this paper, we will describe an all analog phase conjugation circuit solution. the rationale for this was given in , where analog circuits were found to be signifiantly more conservative with regards to power consumption and simplicity when compared to digital techniques. for exmple, it was calculated in that a 4 5 rda operating with data at a bit rate of 20 mb/s requires a dc input power level of 16 w for digital signal processing (dsp) implementation, whereas an analog implementation consumes only 2 w and is largely bandwidth independent. in addition to the power consumption issue, analog electronics are not governed by dsp throughput limitations, i.e., they allow for real time instantaeous processing.

the type of analog retrodirective antenna proposed here opertes without a priori knowledge of the target positon, and thereore provides near instant signal acquisition, 10 ms, in comarison to current motorized tracking antennas (e.g., the hughes 9350 bgan mobile satellite terminal) that take approximately 1 min to acquire since they require a certain acquisition phase before switching to a tracking phase.

the main contributions of this paper over previous works are: 1) first presentation of practical results of a retrodirective array with comparable performance to a commercial satcom user terminal; 2) an in depth analysis of the many design challenges of using analog retrodirective arrays in a satcom application; and 3) six significant changes to the pre existing retrodirective architecture (detailed in section iii).

ii. high performance phase conjugation circuit

the generic block diagram for a "fit for satcom purpose" phase conjugator shown within the context of a single element, after considering the features in table i, is proposed in fig. 1.

in order to recover weak rx signal levels, and also to provide a "clean" retransmit signal, a carrier recovery circuit [tracking phase locked loop (pll)] is required. this tracks the phase of 1

the received signal while concurrently removing its modulation for subsequent rx side processing. the recovered clean carrier is then phase conjugated, and tx modulation is applied to the power amplifier (pa) for self aligned data re transmission to the satellite.

for satcoms, a major challenge is that the system should be able to coherently combine on rx. normally this is a feaure not considered in retrodirective array design, where the emhasis is on unmodified re transmission of incoming pilot and data. with the arrangement in fig. 1, automatic optimal signal re combination from the array rx elements can be performed since each of the array element's carrier recovery circuits output identical phase signals such that phase does not vary with the angle of arrival of the received signal (rx if, fig. 1). this is achieved within the pll circuit by locking the received signal to a constant phase reference signal, as described in detail in . maximal signal recombining from all elements in the array then follows through simple scalar summation at the chosen if freuency. this method allows optimal combination on rx over a wide range of angles of arrival, and thus permits the array factor (af) of the retrodirective antenna to be used both on rx, and on retransmit. fig. 2. retrodirective transceiver architecture for g/t calculation.

figure for a high bit rate l band satcom system reuires to be better than of a retrodirective antenna we use the generic receiver configuration of fig. 2. here, the low frequency if signal presented to the phase detector is considered to be the final received signal, i.e., the one where signal to noise (s/n) ratio will be critical for sucessful demodulation of the data signal. hence, it is essential to know what level of s/n the tracking pll can operate with such that the quality of the regenerated carrier used for retransmit is not adversely affected. 10 db/k. to analyze the

the g/t of a receiver can be characterized by using cascaded

receiver noise temperature, , , where

(1) db k. wider retrodirective fields of view are possible with lower gain eleents or, conversely, smaller numbers of higher gain eleents could be used at the expense of steering coverage.

b. receiver carrier recovery requirements and effect on retransmitted signal

one major challenge of operating a retrodirective array within satcom is that the received signal at each element is generally much weaker than experienced in terrestrial applicaions. levels as low as 130 dbm are present at each element, close to the noise floor of the receiver. the result is that the tracking pll is required to lock to a signal with very low s/n ratio, typically an s/n close to 0 db after the second if filter (fig. 2), resulting in phase jitter on the pll output. the root mean square (rms) phase jitter of a pll type receiver is given by as

equation (2) shows that in order for the pll to recover carrier ) needs to be

information a sufficiently low cutoff frequency ( used as the pll loop filter (fig. 2). in for an input signal of

120 dbm, an if filter bandidth of 3 khz, and a loop filter bandwidth of 99 hz, an rms phase jitter of 6 is predicted. this compares favorably with the measured results of the receiver in fig. 2, which was 5 for a signal level of 130 dbm, 8 predicted, 10 measured. these results confirm that provided the signal strength received at each individual element is above 130 dbm, then accurate phase tracking and conjugation is possible. in an operational inmarsat bgan system the spot beam received signal strength should be in the region of 110 dbm per element. it is shown in that, for a retrodiective array to have the ability to retransmit a high quality retrodirected wavefront, the conjugately phased retransmit carrier signal phases need to be matched within 10 for a 16 element array, meaning that the worst case measured result reported here would be compliant. fig. 3. measured retransmit evm versus received signal strength.

the (vco) 120 dbm input gives an output phase noise of 125 dbc hz @ 1 mhz offset, thus offering a low phase noise conjugately phased retransmit carrier that is suitable to up convert for high quality signal retransmission. phase noise measurements at the if output of

phase tracking pll voltage controlled oscillator (fig. 2) for a

77 dbc hz @ 1 khz offset and

generating the retransmitted signal from the retrodirective array involves applying a modulated tx local oscillator (lo) signal (tx lo in fig. 2) to the tx mixer (fig. 2) and muliplying it with a lower frequency signal from the tracking pll vco (fig. 2), in this case, 156 mhz derived from a phase locked 26 mhz temperature compensated voltage conrolled crystal oscillator (tcvcxo). the lower sideband is filtered (to provide phase conjugation) via the tx filter and transmitted through a pa. assuming the tx mixer and pa are operating in the linear region, then the quality of the reransmitted signal is dependent on the phase noise/phase jitter characteristics of the 156 mhz tracking pll signal.

to determine the quality of the phase modulated retransitted signal we measure the resultant error vector magniude (evm). using the configuration of fig. 2, a 16 qam 151.2 kb/s modulated signal was applied to the tx lo signal and the up converted retransmitted evm measured. the results of fig. 3 show that a signal with a 2.7% evm is retransitted when the retrodirective array is receiving a 110 dbm continuous wave (cw) pilot beacon while simultaneously retransmitting a 16 qam 151.2 kb/s signal. a received signal of 110 dbm per element is fairly typical of an inmarsat spot beam based on practical experience. if the array was receiving a global beam at 130 dbm, then the retransmitted evm for an 8.4 kb/s quadrature phase shift keying (qpsk) signal carried by that beam is about 3.6%.

for a nine element array, using (3), with a 9.5 db af, 6.5 dbi element gain ( , a tx eirp ), one pa per element, of 15 dbw can be achieved through ideal spatial combining with 19.5 dbm ( ) being radiated at each pa per element, suggesting that a singler dual stage pa at each up converter output would be needed. systems such as inmarsat bgan need 3

to conform to the etsi standard for retransmit spectral puity so appropriate filters would be necessary in the tx up conerter chain,

c. effect of tx/rx frequency offset on beam pointing

it was shown in that for a frequency offset retrodirective array that there is a difference in the received signal angle of , arrival, (4), , compared to the retransmitted beam direction,

bgan via inmarsat uses tx/rx 1.65/1.55 ghz freuency operation. if we assume an array size of 3 3 elements, and the commonly used approximation for the shape of the central region of the main beam of an antenna as being

is the boresight gain (db) and the half power where beamwidth is , and we assume the half power beamwidth of a 3 element spacing to be 40 , then from (4) the maximum beam pointing error is 3.2 , and (5) pointing loss is 0.075 db at 40 , which is the maximum azimuth/elevation coverage achievable using the array of planar antennas reported here.

iii. retrodirective satcom pll phase conjugator

the aim of this section is to describe a high performance retrodirective array, which has been tailored for satcom aplications such as inmarsat bgan . there are some signifcant step changes to the retrodirective array to make this posible, which will be discussed in detail.

inmarsat bgan ground terminals rx and tx, respecively, in the frequency range from 1525 to 1559 mhz and from 1626 to 1660 mhz. to facilitate initial pointing of the user ground terminal the bgan system transmits an "always on" global beam at 1537 mhz, which is modulated with qpsk at 8 kb/s. the global beam produces approximately 130 dbm received signal strength at a ground terminal with an omnidiectional antenna. the bgan system's three satellites also suport 256 spot beams per satellite, which are service activated from the user terminal. for current land portable ground terinal operation the user is required to first manually align the terminal. the initial direction can be determined via the use of information fed from a gps receiver. final alignment is then carried through manually peaking a display of the reeived global beam strength. only after this alignment does user terminal transmission occur, which then initiates a spot beam signal response from the satellite. beam is intended to be received with an accurately aligned reltively high gain 12 20 dbi user a terminal antenna. the chalenge with the retrodirective array is that for zero manual alignent each individual low gain element in the rda must be able to track the global beam signal phase independently. for a wide field of view rda each element may only have a gain in the region of 4 5 dbi resulting in a 130 dbm received signal strength at each antenna element output.

an additional challenge is that the signals to be tracked are phase modulated with either qpsk or 16 qam. the classical pll [see fig. 4(a)], configured as a phase locked receiver is unsuitable for tracking phase modulated signals, and can track only cw or am signals. hence, they can only operate with systems that have a separate cw pilot signal on a different frequency to the modulated signal. unfortunately, using an analog pll, it is very difficult to track the phase of these modulated signals, particularly if they contain phase modulation. this is due to the phase detector comparing the incoming phase modulated signal with a stable cw reference signal supplied locally at the retrodirective antenna. with a phase modulated signal the output of the phase detector will not be a stable dc voltage to control the voltage controlled crystal oscillator (vcxo), instead it will fluctuate according to the phase modulation of the signal. this prevents the pll from stably locking.

to counteract this problem the architecture of fig. 4(b) is used, shown here in a simplified form. the basic principle is that the signal from element 1 is used as the phase reference so that the phase detector is presented with two identically modulated signals. this allows for a constant dc voltage to be available at the phase detector output, thus making the self tracking arhitecture completely independent of the modulation type used. the first channel has a fixed lo frequency, and the second uses a vcxo as the lo, which has its control voltage derived from the phase detector. the idea of using a narrowband vcxo is that the jitter and phase noise of the signal is very low, alowing for a high quality spectrally pure signal for retransmision. it is shown in , when phase tracking a received signal of 130 dbm, the phase jitter performance of the vcxo is only degraded by 3 in comparison to the classical phase locked reeiver configuration of .

the architecture of fig. 4(b) results in the two down conerted outputs always being in phase and can therefore be optially combined regardless of input phase of the input signals. the relative phase difference of the lo and vcxo track the phase of the incoming signals and can be used for retransmision, back in the same direction, if they are up converted using a phase conjugating mixer. the representation in fig. 4(b) is a simplified single conversion architecture, in reality, dual stage downconversion is required to allow the removal of image freuencies on the rx mode. larger arrays can be accommodated by using element 1 (fig. 5) as the phase reference and adding additional elements and phase conjugation circuits.

to allow the tracking pll to operate with the challenging link budgets found in systems such as inmarsat bgan, some imrovements, in addition to the above, are required to the retrodiective antenna phase conjugating pll architecture. these are: 1) an active pll loop filter has been added, which is second fig. 4. tracking pll configurations. (a) tracking pll configured as phaseocked receiver. (b) new configuration of tracking pll for tracking phase modlated signals.

order with a cutoff frequency of 100 hz providing the best comromise between pll stability and locking performance to sigals of low s/n ratio; 2) the tx and rx filters use a low loss commercial bgan duplexer (0.8 db loss on rx path, 60 db tx/rx isolation); 3) the if filter prior to the phase detector is a 10 khz bandwidth optimized for the 8.4 kb/s global beam signal; 4) the low noise amplifiers (lna) uses two cascaded lnas to give a combined gain of 30 db and noise figure of 1.2 db; and 5) pas were added to allow transmitted eirps in the fig. 5. accommodation of reference element on a larger 3 3 array.

region of 10 dbw for a 3 agram, incorporating these changes, is shown in fig. 7. 3 element array. the new block di

iv. retrodirective satcom proof of concept array

3 element retrodirective proof of concept array has been constructed [see fig. 6(a)] according to the block diagram of fig. 7. the array elements are approximately spaced to prevent grating lobes. power consumption was measured at 100 mw per element on the rx tracking mode. the size of 3 array is 28 cm 28 cm, cf. 26 cm 32 cm for a com a 3

the 3 mercial conventional terminal (hughes 9201) [see fig. 6(b)]. 5

fig. 7. block diagram showing two elements of the retrodirective array for bgan tracking applications.

by feeding the dual linear ports with 0 and 90 , circular polarzation can be generated over sufficient bandwidth for this aplication. sequential rotation of the antenna elements was deployed in order to reduce the mutual coupling effect and imrove axial ratio, which was determined by the methods of to be most favorable for retrodirective circular polarized array use.

the patch element gain was measured as 6.65 dbi. this reaonably high gain for a single element helps to achieve the boreight g/t and eirp, although is a compromise in terms of the pointing loss obtained at other scanning angles when deployed as a retrodirective array since the element gain reduces by at least 2 db for 40 azimuth/elevation angle, which means that the overall monostatic response of these elements, configured as a retrodirective array, will have a similar pointing loss. this pointing loss is comparable to other satcom proof of concept scanning antennas .

to correct for phase inaccuracies in the tx lo beam forming network, a preset phase adjust is used (shown in fig. 7). this phase shifting arrangement is used as a one off calibration adustment to achieve coherent transmission at boresight. after this adjustment the array will phase conjugate correctly over the required azimuth range.

3 array was measured in a 10 m far field anechoic chamber facility configured for retrodirective monostatic radiaion pattern measurements. in addition, the retrodirective array had the ability to selectively switch on individual elements, alowing active radiation patterns to be measured. the methods of were then used to calculate the bistatic radation patterns, which account for the real effects of the individual elements in the array, rather than the less accurate method of using a generic element, multiplied by the af.

within the anechoic chamber the signal was transmitted to the antenna under test at 1.54 ghz, using a dual polarized horn antenna, which was configured to transmit circular polarization. the retrodirective return signal retransmitted from the antenna under test was then received in the far field by a linear polarized horn antenna. both vertical and horizontal components of the fig. 8. normalized transmitted monostatic/bistatic responses for 3 3 array.

retransmitted signal are measured, and post processed to form circular polarized radiation patterns.

the resulting radiation patterns are shown in fig. 8. these patterns were measured using a received boresight power level at each antenna element of 112 dbm. the received signal was also modulated with qpsk at 8.4 ksym/s, similar to the global beam signal from inmarsat bgan. the results show that the monostatic pattern tracks accurately over the desired scanning range of 40 with a reduction in monostatic gain of around 2 db at these points. at wider scan angles of 80 , the pll circuits lose lock of the received signal, which is to be expected since it is beyond the designed scanning range of the array. from a practical point of view, the pll circuits incorporate a lock detect circuit, used to alert a user of this condition, requiring them to move the antenna back to the 40 coverage cone.

also shown in the graph of fig. 8 is the calculated monostatic pattern based on the active element measurements. this shows the theoretical maximum monostatic gain that can be obtained, assuming perfectly accurate and lossless phase conjugation and spatial power combining occur. the practical monostatic results do not deviate more than 0.5 db from the active pattern calulation for 40 scan angles.

the bistatic patterns, calculated from the individually measured active patterns of each element show a sidelobe reduction of 9 db, referenced to boresight. also superimosed is the measured radiation pattern of the commercial (fixed non beam steered array) satcom terminal (hughes 9201), which shows that the retrodirective array is achieving a similar beamwidth, and sidelobe rejection, to the commercial terminal, at each bistatic scan angle. the bistatic results have a slightly broader beamwidth than other reported retrodirective arrays, e.g., the 10 3 configuration which was optimized for a coverage of 40 in both azimuth and elevation, in comparison to a linear array of elements, which is only capable of scanning in azimuth. 1 reported in . this is due to the 3 fig. 10. measured boresight eirp versus tx lo drive power for 3

90 coverage. the excelemains below 3 db over the entire lent axial ratio and cross polar results are contributed to by using the element sequential rotations of .

on tx mode the eirp was measured at boresight, while simultaneously locking to a signal on rx. the result of fig. 10 shows the transmitted eirp versus the power level applied at the port (fig. 7). an eirp of 14.1 dbw was obtained at the p1db point. typically, for low distortion transmission using phase modulation such as 16 qam, a back off of up to 6 db is required from the p1db point, providing a useable eirp for 16 qam of at least 8.1 dbw.

v. on air inmarsat bgan measurements

to measure the system with actual inmarsat signals the 3 3 array [see fig. 6(a)] was placed outdoors. it was configured for rx operation, with the measured taken from the in phase combined if port, as per fig. 7. for comparison, the results were benchmarked against a commercial bgan user terminal antenna (hughes 9201) [see fig. 6(b)]. on air results for rx mode are presented in order to show that accurate phase tracking of the bgan global beam was possible. it was confirmed, at the time of the measurement, that the bgan global beam was producing a power level in the region of 130 dbm at each antenna element. fig. 11. 3 retrodirective array versus comerical bgan terminal (hughes 9201) receiving a live inmarsat global beam signal. versus azimuth angle of 3

fig. 12. phase tracking ability of two elements of retrodirective array receiving a live inmarsat global beam signal.

10 azimuth not self steering, maintains a 1 db flatness over range. the commercial terminal is able to receive a of 51 dbhz at boresight, whereas the 3 3 retrodirective array, with a similar aperture area, receives 48 dbhz. with regard to table ii when antenna gain is reduced by 1 db, and antenna feed loss is increased by 1 db, reduces by 3 db, thus sugesting the likely differences between retrodirective and comercial terminal rx performance.

to further confirm that the retrodirective antenna is tracking the phase of the global beam signal accurately, results were taken of the phase relationship between two of the 156 mhz tcvcxo signals (fig. 7) since these track the phase of the incoming signal. this result in fig. 12 shows that phase is being recovered with sufficient accuracy so that post conjugation an accurate self pointing high quality signal could be retransmitted back to the satellite.

the challenges involved in using analog retrodirective arrays for use with an actual bgan satcom system. it was shown that it is possible to construct a retrodirective array that can detect received signal power levels as low as 130 dbm and recover phase sufficiently accurately such that simultaneously this paper has presented the first in depth look at 7