satellite radiolocalization from gps to gnss and beyond: novel technologies and applications for civil mass market

the current and forthcoming gnss and associated technologies are discussed from a mass market perspective; hints are given about the future role of digital signal processing and the software defined ratio. by carles ferna´ndez prades, member ieee, letizia lo presti, member ieee, and emanuela falletti

abstract | it is known that satellite radiolocalization was born in the military environment and was originally conceived for defense purposes. nevertheless, the commercial explosion

(dated to 20 years ago) of global positioning system (gps) in the

civil market (automotive, tourism, etc.) significantly changed

the original perspectives of this technology. another big

change is expected when other global navigation satellite

systems (gnsss) such as the european galileo or the chinese

compass become operational and commercial. in fact, modern

gnsss are conceived principally for the civil market (at the opposite of gps, whose civil employment is given as a sort of bkind gift,[ with lower performance than that one granted to military users). the scope of this paper is to provide readers

with a clear focus about the potentialities of current and forth

coming gnsss and associated technologies in a renewed mass

manuscript received october 13, 2010; revised march 14, 2011; accepted may 14, 2011. date of publication july 7, 2011; date of current version october 19, 2011. this work was supported in part by the european commission in the framework of the fp7 network of excellence in wireless communications newcom++ (contract 216715) and cost action ic0803, and by the spanish science and technology commission under project narra (tec2008 02685/tec). c. ferna´ndez prades is with the communications subsystems area, centre tecnolo`gic de telecomunicacions de catalunya (cttc), 08860 barcelona, spain (e mail: carles.fernandez@cttc.cat). l. l. presti is with the dipartimento di elettronica, politecnico di torino, 10129 torino, italy (e mail: letizia.lopresti@polito.it). e. falletti is with the navigation signal analysis and simulation group, istituto superiore mario boella (ismb), 10138 torino, italy (e mail: falletti@ismb.it). market perspective. the paper also opens a window to the

future of radiolocalization technology beyond gps and gnss, dealing with the role of digital signal processing and software

defined radio (sdr) in next generation navigation systems and

with the seamless integration of satellite based navigation with

other technologies in order to provide reliable position infor

mation also in hostile environments.

keywords | compass; european geostationary navigation overlay service (egnos); galileo; global navigation satellite systems (gnsss); global positioning system (gps); glonass;

indian regional navigation satellite system (irnss); inertial

navigation; quasi zenith satellite system (qzss); radio naviga

tion; satellite based augmentation system (sbas); software

receivers; wide area augmentation system (waas)

the art of finding the way from one place to another is called navigation. until the 20th century, the term reerred mainly to guiding ships across the seas. indeed, the word bnavigate[ comes from the latin navis (meaning bship[) and agere (meaning bto move or direct[). today, the word also encompasses the guidance of travel on land, in the air, and in inner and outer space.

this encyclopedic definition talks about art, but navigaion has been (and today still is) a major scientific and technological challenge. navigation seems to start very the early in time: according to chinese storytelling, compass was discovered and used in wars during foggy weather before recorded history. early mariners followed landmarks visible on shore, until other technological breakthroughs came into play: the magnetic compass (c. 13th century), the astrolabe (c. 1484), the sextant (1757), the use of lighthouses and buoys, or the seagoing chronometer invented by harrison in 1764 . these inventions fueled disciplines such as surveying and geodesy, but also had a dramatic impact on transportation, and thus on economics. today, the virtuous circle of science, technology, and business around navigation is still spinning and well alive, as will be described along the following sections of this paper.

the application of radio waves to determine a position starts in the 20th century with the patent of the first direction finding system in 1902 . world war ii spurred hyperbolic, ground based low frequency radio navigation systems such as decca and loran. some time after, technology allowed us to put radiophares in the sky. satellite based navigation, which now is usually referred to with the general framework of global navigation satellite systems (gnsss), started in the early 1960s with the transit system, based on the fact that if the satellite's position were known and predictable, the doppler shift could be used to locate a receiver on earth. the cold war arms race and associated military needs, mostly related to ballistic missiles guidance and the nuclear deterrence posture, required more accurate and reliable navigation systems. thenceforth, the navstar gps program was set in 1973, and in 1974, the first atomic clock was put into orbit. moving forward, the first experimental block i gps satellite was launched in 1978.

in 1983, soviet jet interceptors shot down a korean air civilian airliner carrying 269 passengers that had mistaknly entered soviet airspace. because the crew's access to better navigational tools might have prevented the disaser, u.s. president ronald reagan issued a directive guaanteeing that gps signals would be available at no charge for civilian uses when the system became operational. the commercial market has grown steadily ever since. secondeneration gps satellites were launched beginning in 1989, and the system's full operational capability (foc) was declared in april 1995. since initially the highest quality signal was reserved for military use, the signal available for civilian use was intentionally degraded [selecive availability (sa)]. this changed with the u.s. president bill clinton ordering sa turned off at midnight may 1, 2000. this improved the potential precision of civilian gps receivers from 300 to about 20 m.

in parallel, the former soviet union had begun the development of the glonass system in 1976, also with military endeavors, completing its satellite constellation in 1995. following completion, the system rapidly fell into disrepair with the collapse of the russian economy. begining in 2001, russia committed itself to restoring the system, and as of february 2011 it has been practically restoredv22 satellites are operational. glonass proides two types of navigation signals: standard precision (sp) navigation signal and high precision (hp) navigation signal. sp positioning and timing services are available to all glonass civil users on a continuous, worldwide basis. actually, on may 18, 2007, russian president vladimir putin signed a decree reiterating the offer to provide free access to glonass civil signals.

european's galileo program is the first guaranteed global positioning service under civilian control. the first stage of the galileo program was agreed upon officially on may 26, 2003 by the european union and the european space agency. by the end of 2013, it will have an initial constellation of 16 satellites: 4 in orbit validation (iov) and 12 foc satellites. the european commission anounced that three of the five services offered by the system will be provided in early 2014: the open service (basic signal provided free of charge), the public regulated service (two encrypted signals with controlled access for specific users like governmental bodies, agencies, and organizations involved with defense, internal security, law enforcement, and critical transport, providing position and timing to specific users requiring a high continuity of service), and the search and rescue service (contributing to the international cospas sarsat cooperative system for humanitarian search and rescue activities). the safety ofife service (an enhanced signal including an integrity function that will warn the user within a few seconds in intended for the safety critical case of a malfunction, transport community, e.g., aviation) and the commercial service (combination of two encrypted signals for higher data throughput rate and higher accuracy authenticated data) will be tested in 2014 and will be provided as the system reaches foc with 30 satellites.

china is also deploying a gnss named compass. as of february 2011, there were seven launched satellites, five more will be launched before the end of 2012, and it was announced that the foc (comprising up to 35 satellites) would be put in place by 2020.

these new deployments and system modernizations depict an unforeseen and close forthcoming scenario with a plurality of systems, satellite constellations, frequency bands, and new signal structures ready to be exploited. from a situation in which gps has been the mainvif not the solevplayer in satellite navigation, the rebirth of glonass, the advent of galileo and compass, the inreasing regional system alternatives (qzss or irnss), and the worldwide maturity of augmentation systems (waas, egnos, msas, gagan) make the design of future gnss receivers more complex, since the number of visible satellites is expected to increase from the current 10 13 values to 30 40. multiconstellation/multifrequency gnss receivers, complemented with regional information, promise dramatically improved positioning solutions and enhanced integrity, at the expense of posing a number of challenges to the navigation engineering community. topics such as accuracy, precision, robustness, reliability, interoperability with other systems, shorter time to first fix, satellite selection, and coverage shall be tacked from novel points of view, enabling unexplored business models and applications that only imagination can bound.

this paper reviews imminently or already available civil signals for satellite based navigation in section ii, with special emphasis on the benefits of new signals and combining methods. augmentation systems, both satellite and ground based, are discussed in section iv. architecural trends for gnss receivers are inspected in section v, including advanced signal processing algorithms for signal acquisition and tracking. section vi shows how other sources of information such as inertial sensors can be integrated with the navigation system and interoperate with it. section vii takes a glimpse into the mass market perspective at the light of location based services (lbss) and intelligent (itss). finally, section viii concludes the paper and draws topics for further research.

ii. global navigation satellite systems and s ignals

gnss space vehicles broadcast a low rate navigation mesage that modulates continuous repetitions of pseudoranom spreading codes, which in turn are modulating a carrier signal allocated in the l band. the navigation mesage, after proper demodulation, contains among other information the so called ephemeris, a set of parameters that allow the computation of the satellite position at any time. these positions, along with the corresponding disance estimations, allow the receiver to compute its own position and time, as we will see hereafter.

the distance between the receiver and a given satellite

where c ¼ 299 792 458 m/s is the speed of light, trx is the receiving time in the receiver's clock, and ttx is the time of transmission for a given satellite i. receiver clocks are inexpensive and not perfectly in sync with the satellite clock, and thus this time deviation is another variable to be estimated. the clocks on all of the satellites belonging to the same system s, where s ¼ f gps, galileo, glonass, . . .g, are in sync with each other, so the receiver's clock will be out of sync with all satellites belonging to the same constellation by the same amount (cid:2)tðsþ. in gnss, the term pseudorange is used to identify a range affected by a bias, directly related to the bias between the receiver and satelite clocks. there are other factors of error: since propagaion at speed c is only possible in the vacuum, atmospheric status affects the propagation speed of electromagnetic waves modifying the propagation time and thus the disance estimation. for instance, the ionosphere is a plasmaic medium that causes a slowdown in the group velocity and a speedup of the phase velocity, having an impact in code and phase delays and, thus, impeding precise navigaion when its effects are not mitigated. actually, errors can be on the order of tens of meters in geomagnetic storm episodes . ionospheric delay is a well defined function proportional to the inverse square of frequency and the total electron content (tec)vwhich has diurnal, seasonal and long term variationsvalong the signal path. acually, this frequency dependence allows a multiband receiver to remove the ionospheric effect by proper cominations of observations in different bands. as we will see in section iv, there are complementary systems that inform purposely equipped receivers about the tec status in order to alleviate the impact of those effects, and thus improve precision in the final navigation solution. this can also be done by differential systems, where a network of well positioned, ground fixed receivers measure the tec status and broadcast the corrections to the surrounding rover receivers.

for each in view satellite i of system s, we can write

where ðxtx i þ is the satellite's position (known from the navigation message), ðx; y; zþ is the receiver's position, and (cid:3)e gathers other sources of error. since the receiver needs to estimate its own 3 d position (three spatial unknowns) and its clock deviation with respect to the satellites' time basis, at least 3 þ ns satellites must be seen by the receiver at the same time, where ns is the number of different navigation systems available (in view) at a given time. each received satellite signal, once synhronized and demodulated at the receiver, defines one equation such as the one defined in (2), forming a set of nonlinear equations that can be solved algebraically by means of the bancroft algorithm or numerically, resorting to multidimensional newton raphson and weighted least square methods . when a priori inforation is added we resort to bayesian estimation, a problem that can be solved recursively by a kalman filter or any of its variants. the problem can be further expanded by adding other unknowns (for instance, parameters of ionospheric and tropospheric models), sources of informaion from other systems, mapping information, and even motion models of the receiver. in the design of multionstellation gnss receivers, the vector of unknowns can also include the receiver clock offset with respect to each system in order to take advantage of a higher number of ; ytx i ; ztx

i in view satellites and using them jointly in the navigation solution, therefore increasing accuracy.

the analytic representation of a signal received from a

gnss satellite can be generically expressed as

where (cid:4)ðtþ is the amplitude, stðtþ is the complex baseband transmitted signal, (cid:5)ðtþ is the time varying delay, fdðtþ ¼ fc(cid:5)ðtþ is the doppler shift, fc is the carrier frequency, and nðtþ is a noise term. these signals arrive to the earth's surface at extremely low power (e.g., (cid:2)158.5 dbw for gps l1 c/a code, (cid:2)157 dbw for galileo e1), well below the noise floor. in order to estimate its distances to satellites, the receiver must correlate time aligned replicas of the corresponding pseudorandom code with the incoming signal, in a process called despreading that provides proessing gain only to the signal of interest. after a coarse and fine estimation stages of the synchronization paramters (usually known as acquisition and tracking, respecively), signal processing output is in the form of observables: 1) the pseudorange (code) measurement, equivalent to the difference of the time of reception (expressed in the time frame of the receiver) and the time of transmission (expressed in the time frame of the satelite) of a distinct satellite signal; and optionally 2) the carrier phase measurement, actually being a measurement on the beat frequency between the received carrier of the satellite signal and a receiver generated reference freuency. carrier phase measurements are ambiguous, in the sense that the integer number of carrier wavelengths between a satellite and the receiver's antenna is unknown. techniques such as least square ambiguity decorrelation approach (lambda) or multi carrier ambiguity resolution (mcar) can be applied to resolve such ambiguity and provide an accurate estimaion of the distance between the satellite and the reeiver. then, depending on the required accuracy, the navigation solution can range from pseudorange only, computationally low demanding, and limited accuracy least squares methods to sophisticated combinations of code and phase observables at different frequencies for high demanding applications such as surveying, geodesy, and geophysics.

next sections provide brief descriptions of the space segment of different gnsss and their broadcast signal structures accessible by civilians.

the navstar gps is a space based radio navigation system owned by the united states government (usg) and operated by the united states air force (usaf). gps provides positioning and timing services to military and civilian users on a continuous, worldwide basis. two gps services are provided: the precise positioning service (pps), available primarily to the military of the united states and its allies, and the standard positioning service (sps) open to civilian users.

gps l1. defined in , this band is centered at fgps l1 ¼ 1575.42 mhz. the complex baseband transmitted signal can be written as

h (cid:4) cpðyþ jljlpðyþ i

where (cid:4) is the exclusive or operation (modulo 2 addition), jljl means l modulo l, ½l(cid:3)l means the integer part of l=l, dnav is the gps navigation transmitted at 50 b/s, message bit sequence, tc;pðyþ ¼ ð1=10:23þ (cid:7)s, tc;c=a ¼ ð1=1:023þ (cid:7)s, lpðyþ ¼ 6:1871 (cid:5) 1012, and pðtþ is a rectangular pulse of a chip period duration centered at t ¼ 0 and filtered at the transmitter. according to the chip rate, the binary phase shift keying modulaions in (5) and (6) are denoted as bpsk(10) and bpsk(1), respectively. the precision p codes (named y codes whenever the antispoofing mode is activated, encrypting the code and thus denying non u.s. military users) are sequences of seven days in length. regarding the modernization plans for gps, it is worthwhile to mention that there is a new civilian use signal planned, called l1c and defined in , to be broadcast on the same l1 frequency that currently contains the c=a signal. the l1c will be available with first block iii launch, currently scheduled for 2013. the impleentation will provide c=a code to ensure backward compatibility.

gps l2c. defined in , it is only available on block iir m and subsequent satellite blocks. centered at fgps l2 ¼ 1227.60 mhz, the signal structure is the same as in (4), with the precision code in the in phase component, just as in (5) but the navigation with an optional presence of (4)

where tc;l2c ¼ (1/511.5) ms and p1=2ðtþ is a recangular pulse of half chip period duration, thus time multiplexing both codes. the civilian long code ccl is lcl ¼767 250 chips long, repeating every 1.5 s, while the civilian moderate code ccm is lcl ¼ 10 230 chips long and its repeats every 20 ms. the cnav data is an upgraded version of the original nav navigation message, containing higher precision representation and nominally more accuate data than the nav data. it is transmitted at 25 b/s with forward error correction (fec) encodng, resulting in 50 symbols per second (sps). • gps l5. the gps l5 link, defined in , is only available in block iif (first satellite launched on may, 2010) and subsequent satellite blocks. centered at fgps l5 ¼ 1176:45 mhz, this signal in space can be written as: where tc;nh ¼ 1 ms and tc;l5 ¼ (1/10.23) (cid:7)s, thus defining a bpsk(10) modulation. both l5i and l5q contain synchronization sequences.

the nominal baseline constellation of the russian fedration's global navigation satellite system (glonass) comprises 24 glonass m satellites that are uniformly deployed in three roughly circular orbital planes at an inclination of 64.8(cid:7) to the equator. the altitude of the orbit is 19 100 km. the orbit period of each satellite is 11 h, 15 min, and 45 s. the orbital planes are separated by 120(cid:7) right ascension of the ascending node. eight satellites are equally spaced in each plane with 45(cid:7) argument of latitude. moreover, the orbital planes have an argument of latitude displacement of 15(cid:7) relative to each other.

glonass civil signal in space is defined in . this system makes use of a frequency division multiple access transmitting in two bands: (fdma) signal structure, f ðkþ glo l1 ¼ 1602 þ k (cid:5) 0:5625 mhz and f ðkþ glo l2 ¼ 1246 þ k (cid:5) 0:4375 mhz, where k 2 f(cid:2)7; (cid:2)6; . . . ; 5; 6g is the channel number. satellites in opposite points of an orbit plane transmit signals on equal frequencies, as these satelites will never be in view simultaneously by a groundased user.

glonass l1. two kinds of signals are transitted: an sp and an obfuscated hp signal. the complex baseband transmitted signal can be written as

with bpsk(5) and bpsk(0.5) modulations

where tc;hp ¼ (1/5.11) (cid:7)s, tc;sp ¼ (1/0.511) (cid:7)s, and lhp ¼ 3:3554 (cid:5) 107. the navigation message dgnav is transmitted at 50 b/s. details of its conent and structure, as well as the generation of the csp code, can be found in . the usage of the hp signal should be agreed with the russian federaion defense ministry, and no more details have been disclosed. launched in 2001, a second civil signal is available using the same sp code as the one in the l1 band. the use of fdma techniques, in which the same code is used to broadcast navigation signals on different freuencies, and the placement of civil glonass transmisions on frequencies close to 1600 mhz, well above the gps l1 band, have complicated the design of combined glonass/gps receivers, particularly low cost equipment for mass market applications. future plans of moderniation are intended to increase compatibility and interperability with other gnss, and include the addition of a code division multiple access (cdma) structure, and possibly binary offset carrier (boc) modulation, begining with the third civil signal in the l3 band (1197.648 1212.255 mhz). russia is implementing the new signals on the next generation glonass k satellites, with a first prototype successfully launched into orbit on february 26, 2011.

the nominal galileo constellation comprises a total of 27 operational satellites (plus three active spares), which are evenly distributed among three orbital planes inclined at 56(cid:7) relative to the equator. there are nine operational satellites per orbital plane, occupying evenly distributed orbital slots. three additional spare satellites (one per orital plane) complement the nominal constellation confiuration. the galileo satellites are placed in quasi circular earth orbits with a nominal semi major axis of about 30 000 km and an approximate revolution period of 14 h. the control segment full infrastructure will be composed of 30 40 sensor stations, three control centers, nine mision uplink stations, and five tt&c stations.

galileo's open service is defined in , where the

galileo e1. this band, centered at

fgal e1 ¼ 1575.420 mhz and with a reference bandwidth of 24.5520 mhz, uses the so called composite binary offset carrier cboc(6,1,1/11) modulation, defined in baseband as channel b contains the i/nav type of navigation message di=nav, intended for safety of life (sol) services

in case of channel c, it is a pilot (dataless) channel with a secondary code, forming a tiered code

with tc;e1b ¼ tc;e1cp ¼ (1/1.023) (cid:7)s and tc;e1cs ¼ 4 ms. the ce1b and ce1cp primary codes are pseudorandom memory code sequences defined in [13, annex c.7 and c.8]. the binary sequence of the secondary code ce1cs is 0011100000001010110 110010. this band also contains another compoent, galileo e1a, intended for the public reguated service (prs). the prs spreading codes and the structure of the navigation message have not been made public.

galileo e6. intended for the commercial service and centered at fgal e6 ¼ 1278.750 mhz, this band provides pilot and data components

where dc=nav is the c/nav navigation data stream, which is modulated with the encrypted ranging code ce6b with chip period tc;e6 ¼ (1/5.115) (cid:7)s, thus being a bpsk(5) modulation. codes ce6b and primary codes ce6cs and their respective lengths le6b and le6c have not been published. the secondary codes for the pilot component ce6cs are available in . the receiver reference bandwidth for this signal is 40.920 mhz. galileo e5. centered at fgal e5 ¼ 1191.795 mhz and with a total bandwidth of 51.150 mhz, its sigal structure deserves some analysis. the altboc modulation can be generically expressed as

þðsignðcosð2(cid:6)fstþþ þ w h e r e jsignðsinð2(cid:6)fstþþþ is the single sideband subcarier, fs is the subcarrier frequency, ð(cid:5)þ(cid:8) stands for the conjugate operation, and x1ðtþ and x2ðtþ are qpsk signals. the resulting waveform does not exhibit constant envelope. in case of galileo, the need for high efficiency of the satellites' onboard high power amplifier (hpa) has pushed a modiication on the signal in order to make it envelope constant and thus use the hpa at saturation. this can be done by adding some intermodulation products to (24), coming up with the following definition:

where the single and product sideband signal subarriers are ee5aiðtþ ¼ xþ1

where tc;e5s ¼ 1 ms and tc;e5p ¼ (1/10.23) (cid:7)s. channel a contains the f/nav type of navigation message df=nav, intended for the open service. the i/nav message structures for the e5bi and e1b signals use the same page layout. only page sequencing is different, with page swapping beween both components in order to allow a fast reception of data by a dual frequency receiver. the single subcarrier scsðtþ and the product subcarrier scpðtþ of (26) and (27) are defined as

with a subcarrier frequency of fs ¼ 15.345 mhz, thus defining an altboc(15,10) modulation. ploting the power spectrum of the carriers in (25) (see fig. 1), we can see that the qpsk(10) signal ee5aðtþ : fgal e5 (cid:2) fs ¼ defined in (25) is shifted to fgal e5a¼ 1176.450 mhz, while ee5bðtþ is shifted to : fgal e5 þ fs ¼ 1207:140 mhz . thus, we fgal e5b¼ can bandpass filter around fgal e5a and get a good approximation of a qpsk(10) signal, with very low energy components of ee5bðtþ, (cid:3)ee5aðtþ, and (cid:3)ee5bðtþ: fig. 1. power spectrum of single and product sideband subcarriers signals in (25), normalized to the power of ssc(cid:8) modified altboc modulation can be well approximated by two qpsk signals 2fs apart, with negligible contribution of the crossed terms around its center frequency.

the same applies to ee5bðtþ, allowing an indepenent reception of two qpsk(10) signals and thus requiring considerably less bandwidth than the processing of the whole e5 band. a hardware architecture proposal for an altboc(15,10) receivr is found in .

the chinese compass navigation satellite system will consist of five geostationary satellites and 30 nongeostaionary satellites. the geostationary satellites will be loated at 58.75(cid:7) e, 80(cid:7) e, 110.5(cid:7) e, 140(cid:7) e, and 160(cid:7) e. nongeostationary satellites will be in medium earth orbit (meo) and inclined geosynchronous orbit. after the first satellite (located at 140(cid:7) e) was launched on october 31, 2000, a second satellite (located at 80(cid:7) e) and a third satellite (located at 110.5(cid:7) e) were launched on december 21, 2000 and may 25, 2003, respectively. the first meo satellite, named compass m1, was launched on april 14, 2007, and its signals have been unraveled by independent research . the first geostationary satellite compass g2 was launched on april 15, 2009, and the second one g3 on june 2, 2010. global coverage is planned by 2020. the ground segment will consist of one master control station, two upload stations, and 30 monitor staions. this system will provide three frequency bands: b1, centered at 1561.098 mhz and carrying a qpsk(2) signal with a 4 mhz bandwidth; b2, centered at 1207.14 mhz, with one bpsk(2) and one bpsk(10) with a 24 mhz bandwidth; and b3, centered at 1268 and carrying a qpsk(10) with the same bandwidth as b2. to the authors' knowledge, no official interface control document has been made public as of february 2011.

e. benefits of new signals and combining methods potential benefits of new signals and their combinaions are expected to be high in terms of accuracy and reliability. from a signal processing perspective, power spectrum shapes of new signals allow for improved perforance in time delay estimation. the crame´r rao lower bound (crlb) is the theoretical limit of variance that any unbiased estimator can achieve. in case of the time delay estimation, its minimum variance is defined by

where e=n0 is the received signal energy to noise powerpectral density ratio, f is the frequency in hertz, and srðf þ is the normalized power spectral density of the code modulation. therefore, the integral represents the second moment of srðf þ. the square root of this second moment is commonly referred to as rms or gabor bandwidth , and it is a fundamental parameter in code modulation deign in order to theoretically achieve a smaller time delay error

inspecting (44), it can be observed that the gabor bandwidth can be increased by using modulations whose power spectrum concentrates a greater percentage of their power farther from the signal center frequency, because of the weighting term f 2. this approach has been followed in the definition of the modernized and forthcoming gnss signals with the introduction of the boc modulation, where a square carrier of frequency fs splits the main lobe of the code spectrum into two lobes centered at (cid:10)fs from frequency, thus allocating more power at the central higher frequencies and potentially improving synchroniation performance.

from a multiband receiver perspective, more freuency bands means more possibilities to resolve the unnown cycle ambiguities of the double differenced carrier phase data to integers, a key aspect for rapid and very precise (centimeter level) gnss positioning. multiple bands also allow linear combinations of observables that can be used to eliminate or mitigate individual sources of error (e.g., the ionospheric effect can be removed by (43)

(44) inrom a multiconstellation receiver perspective, creased coverage and reliability are the expected outcomes as more satellites will be available. novel approaches to positioning such as direct position estimation could deeply combine signals and further increase positioning performance in hostile (radioelectrically speaking) scenaros, as shown in .

iii . regional navigation satellite systems (rns s)

regional systems provide additional signals from satellites operating over a given geographical area that are compaible with one or more gnss systems. currently there are two main rnsss.

a. quasi zenith satellite system (qzss)

the qzss is designed to work in conjunction with, and to enhance, the civil services of other gnsss in japan, particularly in urban environments where buildings block visibility of a great portion of the sky. the planned qzss constellation consists of three satellites that would be placed in highly elliptical periodic orbits (heo), at geosynchronous altitude (around 35 786 km) inclined 43(cid:7) to the equatorial plane. the three orbital planes draw the same eight shaped ground track, with the northern loop covering a much smaller geographical area (mainly the central part of japan) than the southern one (covering australia and new guinea), with a central line at 135(cid:7) e in longitude. these orbits allow the satellites to dwell for more than 12 h/day with an elevation above 70(cid:7), meaning that they appear almost overhead most of the time, and giving rise to the term bquasi zenith[ for which the system is named. the first satellite was launched on september 11, 2010.

qzss satellites will transmit six positioning signals: l1c/a, l1 saif, and l1c signals centered at 1575.42 mhz (common with gps l1 and galileo e1), the l2c signal centered at 1227.60 mhz (common with gps l2c), the lex signal at 1278.75 mhz (common with galileo e6), and the l5 signal at 1176.45 mhz (common with gps l5). l1c/a, l1c, l2c, and l5 will be positioning availability enhancement signals, because they will complement existng gnss. l1 saif and lex will be positioning performance enhancement transmitting differential data of existing gnss and integrity data concerning gnss signals as determined by qzss. although the interface specificaion document is still in draft , l1 and l2 signals should be defined with a bandwidth of 24 mhz, l5 signals with 24.9 mhz, and lex with 42 mhz. signals in l1, l2, and l5 will be very similar to their counterparts in gps, making use of pseudorandom codes defined in the gps's interface specification documents but not used by any gps satellite. the irnss, developed by the indian space research organization, will offer a standard positioning service using bpsk(1) modulation as well as a restricted/authoized service employing a boc(5,2) modulation. both of these services will be provided at two frequencies in the l5 and s bands. the space segment will comprehend seven satellites: three of them in a geo orbit at 34(cid:7), 83(cid:7), and 132(cid:7) e, while the other four will have a geosynchronous orbit at 29(cid:7) inclination, with longitude crossing at 55(cid:7) and 111(cid:7) e . the first satellite is scheduled to launch in the first half of 2012 . the system is intended to provide an all weather absolute position accuracy ð2(cid:3)þ of better than 20 m throughout india and within a region extending approximately 1500 km around it.

i v. augmentation systems

gnss receivers' performance can be augmented by means of complementary systems. accuracy (difference between the estimated position and the true position), integrity (a measure of trust placed in the correctness of the inforation provided by the navigation system, and its ability to provide timely warnings), availability (the probability that the navigation and fault detection functions are operaional), continuity (the ability to provide the navigation function over time), and time to first fix can be dramaically enhanced when additional information external to the receiver is provided. for instance, the receiver can be precisely informed about the ionosphere status (i.e., the electron content), allowing the removal of the bias it provokes in the observables, and thus improving the accuacy of the final navigation solution. another example is integrity, a key factor in safety critical applications. users may determine their integrity by receiver autonomous algorithms (raim) , or by using external integrity data sources. galileo foresees the provision of integrity data within the navigation message, although this service will not likely be implemented in the first foc phase. usually, external sources (the so called augmentation systems) consist of a set of fixed, accurately surveyed receivers forming a network of reference (or control, or fiducial) stations. the observations taken by this reference network are broadcast to the rover gnss receiver, which processes them simultaneously with its own observations, removing common sources of error, and detecting inconsistencies in the navigation solution based on the exploitation of redunant gnss measurements. hereafter, we provide descripions of such augmentation systems, classified according to information is sent to the the way how this external receiver. such systems are commonly composed of multiple ground stations, located at accurately surveyed points. the ground stations take measurements of one or more of the gnss satellites, the satellite signals, or other environmental facors which may affect the signal received by the users. using these measurements, information messages are created and sent to geostationary satellites for broadcast to the end users. while sbas implementations may vary widely, rules from the international civil aviation organiation (icao) establish that an sbas must transmit a specific message format and frequency, as defined in for civil aviation use. actual implementations are as follows.

1) wide area augmentation system (waas): the waas , operated by the u.s. federal aviation administraion, has declared to offer continuous service for nonsafety applications since august 2000, and it was commissioned for safety of life services in july 2003. the system is composed of two geostationary satellites located at 133(cid:7) w and 107(cid:7) w, broadcasting gps like ranging signals at both gps l1 and l5 carrier frequencies , and a ground network with monitors throughout the united states, canada, and mexico. a group of master stations collect measurements from this reference stations network, build the sbas message, and upload the message to the geo satellites. the waas improves accuracy in two fundaental ways: 1) it reduces range measurement error by sending differential corrections for each gps satellite, reducing the pseudorange measurement error from around 30 m to approximately 1 or 2 m ð1(cid:3)þ, and 2) it improves geometry by adding new ranging signals to the set of available gps measurements, since the phase of the waas code is synchronized to gps time. the system also moniors integrity, broadcasting error bounds for each moniored satellite and updating this information within 6 s of any significant change.

2) european geostationary navigation overlay service (egnos): the egnos consists of three geostationary satellites and a network of ground stations, operative since 2009. it is intended to supplement the gps, glonass, and galileo systems by reporting on the reliability and accuracy of the signals. specifications state that horizontal position accuracy should be better than 7 m, but in practice it is better than 2 m with an availability above 99%. document details the general conditions relating to the use of the egnos service, a technical description of the signal in space, the reference receiver, environmental conditions, the service performance achieved, and aspects relating to service provision. egnos will offer also a commercial service, a ground based access to its data through egnos data access service (edas), and a sol service . main applications of egnos are aviation, precision agriculture, maritime, land transportation, and time standard. 3) others: other sbas are the multifunctional satellite augmentation system (msas), operated by japan's ministry of land, infrastructure and transport, that was commissioned for aviation use on september 27, 2007, the gps and geo augmented navigation (gagan) planned by india , and the russian system for differential correction and monitoring (sdcm). commercial systems include starfire and omnistar , offering subecimetric accuracy. there also exists a proposal of a universal sbas (u sbas) standard that carries addiional channels (signals and messages) to cover the nonaeonautical specific sol services, and also: high precision positioning services, position velocity time (pvt), authenication services, safety services, scientific application serices, high precision timing services, etc. u sbas is designed to be fully interoperable with the current sbas standards and to allow significant performance and service improvements in operational, scientific, and/or security areas.

b. ground based augmentation systems (gbas)

systems that support augmentation through the use of terrestrial radio messages are called gbass. as with sbass, gbass are commonly composed of one or more accurately surveyed ground stations, which take measureents concerning the gnss, and one or more radio transitters, which transmit the information directly to the end user. these systems are usually devoted to air traffic mangement, specifically aircraft landing guidance. the netork of reference stations are localized around an airport, supporting receivers within 20 km, and the differential corrections and integrity information are broadcast over a very high frequency (vhf) data broadcast (vdb) signal transmitted in the 108.0 117.975 mhz band .

1) ground based regional augmentation system (gras): they support a large regional area. a network of fixed, reference stations broadcast the difference between the positions indicated by the satellite systems and their known fixed positions. these stations broadcast the diference between the measured satellite pseudoranges and actual (internally computed) ones, so that receiver devices may correct their pseudoranges by the same amount. the correction signal is typically broadcast by an ultrahighrequency (uhf) radio modem. since satellite ephemeris errors and atmospheric errors vary with space, accuracy degrades with the distance to the reference stations. precision can be enhanced by exploiting carrier phase measurements. real time kinematic (rtk) positioning has become an industry standard procedure in surveying, lab prototypes for research activities, machine control, and other high precision applications. rtk makes use of carrier phase and pseudorange measurements recorded at a (usually) fixed reference location with known coordiates and transmitted in real time to a user's rover receiver using a radio link of some kind. the rover processes the double differences of observations to determine its coordiates with accuracy better than 10 cm. this method asumes that the differential ionospheric delay between the reference and the rover receiver is negligible, which works well for baselines up to 10 20 km. the coverage can be enlarged by a set of reference receivers, resorting to netork rtk (nrtk). this approach achieves real time subdecimeter error level positioning with distances up to 50 70 km.

this concept has been extended by exploiting the full geometry of the observations in a real time ionospheric model of the slant delay: a central processing facility (cpf) combines new ionospheric tomography and traveling ionospheric disturbance models with real time undiffernced processing of measurements from widely separated permanent gnss receivers. the cpf provides the rover receivers with undifferenced accurate ionospheric correcions in real time, which are used to enhance the final position estimation up to typical accuracies of around 10 cm of error, within a short convergence time . this approach, known as wide area rtk (wartk), allows for permanent stations 500 900 km apart (thus implying a dramatic reduction of reference stations with respect to nrtk), and it is able to provide coverage at a continental scale.

2) assisted gnss: existing wireless infrastructure can be used to broadcast information that would allow the reeiver to perform better in terms of time to fix, sensitivity, and accuracy, an approach known as assisted gnss. for instance, if navigation data are made available to the reeiver via gprs, wifi or other, it can notably reduce its time to first fix (ttff) and improve receiver sensitivity. furthermore, the delivery of precise orbit predictions can also help to improve the receiver performance . a gnss is becoming extremely popular in low cost deices, thanks to the wide current coverage of the cellular communications networks and industrial standardization. cellular industry location standards first appeared in the late 1990s, with the 3rd generation partnership (3gpp) radio resource location services protocol (rrlp) technical specification 44.031 positioning protocol for gsm netorks. today, rrlp is the de facto standardized protocol to carry gnss assistance data to gnss enabled mobile deices . a major update began in 2007, when rrlp release 7 added support for assisted galileo, and release 8 for the rest of the gnss including the various sbas. the two releases provided native assistance data types such as global klobuchar and nequick models for the ionosphere , . the same approach was also mapped to 3gpp ts 25.331 radio resource control (rrc) protocol, which defines the positioning procedures and assistance data delivery for umts terrestrial radio access (utra). 1892 proceedings of the ieee | vol. 99, no. 11, november 2011 location center (e smlc) is the server component in charge of positioning activities. the mobility management entity (mme) gives the positioning request to e smlc, which then controls the user equipment to be positioned and, possibly, lte base stations, to perform positioning. the actual positioning and assistance protocol between emlc and the user equipment is called lte positioning protocol (lpp).

rrlp, rrc, and lpp are natively control plane posiioning protocols, i.e., they use cellular signaling channels as the transport mechanism for the assistance data and position information. since signaling channels are not deigned to transfer large amount of information, in 2003, the open mobile alliance (oma) started to work with seure user plane location (supl) 1.0 protocol, which brings the same location capabilities to user plane (and thus the traffic channels) over ip networks as rrlp/rrc/lpp bring to control plane. supl 1.0 is already commercially deloyed, and supl 2.0 is now being deployed globally. these protocols typically address richer gnss features for lbss.

lte release 9 introduced extension hooks in lpp mesages, so that the bodies external to 3gpp could extend the lpp feature set. oma lpp extensions (lppe), supported in supl 3.0, build on top of the 3gpp lpp, reusing its proedures and data types as far as possible. this ensures that in the user plane domain, which dominates in consumer lbss (lbs), vendors can utilize exactly the same protocol as in the control plane. this reduces implementation, testing, and deployments costs, and probably will make the lpp/lppe the de facto standardized positioning protocol in the mobile domain .

two different methodologies of assistance have been standardized, usually referred to as mobile station (ms) based (ue based) and ms assisted (ue assisted). in the ms based approach, the network operator provides the gnss enabled mobile device with assistance data such as, at a minimum, an approximate location coming from the serving cell tower, an approximate time (accurate to a few seconds), and a description of the satellite orbits and clock errors (navigation model); the receiver uses that informaion to estimate the expected delays and doppler shifts of the visible satellites and proceeds to the acquisition of satellite signals with a narrower search space, allowing a dramatic reduction of the ttff. finally, location inforation is sent back to the network in response to the location request. (kalman like) navigation filters, and are well suited to continuous navigation by delivering ephemeris data. howver, the amount of data exchanged in the ms based aproach is significantly larger than that of the ms assisted one (currently about seven times), and is expected to increase in short with the addition of new gnss satellites.

v. technologi es and architectures for gnss re ceivers

global marketplace for gnss receivers has been tradiionally based on application specific integrated circuit (asic) technology, an approach with high development costs but extremely low cost per unit (thus ensuring reenues) and high performance. however, recent and forthcoming changes in the space segment are pushing developers to new approaches and targeting designs to unforeseen levels of accuracy, reliability, and availability. this requires more flexibility in the design and implemenation processes, driving to more agile development tools. although asic technology remains pervasive for mass market applications, other technologies such as fieldrogrammable gate array (fpga) or software defined radio (sdr) running in digital signal processor (dsp), microprocessors, or even regular pcs are of great interest for limited market but highly demanding applications such as reference stations, geodesy and surveying, timing, mahine control, and data gathering for scientific purposes (study of ionosphere, troposphere, weather forecasting, etc.).

today, established chipsets and original equipment manufacturer (oem) modules dominate the market, speially mass market applications in the form of smarthones, digital cameras and camcoders, portable gaming consoles, media players, and personal navigation devices. those chips are asics, nonstandard integrated circuits that have been designed for a specific use or application. generally, an asic is undertaken for a product that will have a large production run, since the cost of an asic development is high and thus targeted to high volume productions. in commercial receivers, asics are used to handle the downconversion and digitizing, and to carry out massively parallel correlation operations, while microrocessors such as an arm processor are utilized for baseband signal processing. current technology allows for a higher level of integration: there are commercial soluions that integrate a whole gps receiver (from the antenna to the output in nmea 0183 standard data format that includes position, velocity, and time) in a single chip . mass production that reduces the overall fabrication cost and time. there are a number of radio frequency (rf) ips and baseband ips commercially available. according to a recent market study , broadcom corporation was the leading supplier of gps chips worldwide in march 2009. sirf technology, inc. and texas instruments, inc. came in second and third place in the gps integrated circuit manufacturer vendor list. then followed qualcomm inc., stmicroelectronics, u blox ag, atheros communications, inc., infineon technologies ag, atmel corporation, and mediatek, inc.

since the vast majority of existing integrated circuits are intended for the gps l1 c/a signal, they make use of a 2 mhz rf bandwidth, which is enough for the bpsk signal defined in (6) but prevent from the use of the galileo e1 signal defined in (16) (20) due to the characeristics of the cboc split spectrum nature, which reuires at least 4 mhz (although 8 mhz is recommended; see ) rf bandwidth for proper synchronization. new signals will push new designs addressing both challenging electrical requirements (wider bandwidths, more freuency bands) and associated computational load. evenually, the mass market will pose requirements in terms of accuracy, coverage, and reliability that existing gps only designs would not be able to meet, and therefore an evolution in gnss chipset design is envisaged. the trend seems to point towards an increasing integration of techologies (i.e., cellular , wifi , rfid , uwb , wireless sensor networks , or motion sensors ), vertical integration and disappearance of indepenent chipset manufacturers, lower power consumption, improved sensitivity, and smaller footprint. as discussed in , the galileo's e1/e5a combination could be the best dual frequency solution for a galileo mass market receiver, since it overlaps exactly with gps' l1/l5 frequency bands and would allow multiband/ multiconstellation receivers at reasonable electrical and computational requirements. lower cost,

b. software defined radio receivers

the last decade has witnessed a rapid evolution of gnss software receivers. since the first gps standard positioning service software receiver described in , where the concept of bandpass sampling (or intentional aliasing) was introduced, several works were devoted to architectural and implementation aspects. for instance, krumvieda et al. provided details about analog toigital conversion (adc), high sensitivity signal acquisiion, and different tracking loops, and chakravarthy et al. discussed real time issues such as the transition from acquisition to tracking. textbooks and increased the awareness of the community about the great benefits provided by software receivers with respect to the traditional hardware oriented approach, providing matlab implementations of a complete gps receiver. in order to accelerate computations and attain real time in commodity general purpose processors, bitwise operations were introduced in . the use of single input multiple data (simd) parallel computing technology for the correlators and other time critical operations is due to , a solution that exploited an extension set of assembly instructions for intel processors. both approaches suffered from being bitepth dependent, jeopardizing flexibilityvsignal quantiication cannot be easily changed. other recent approaches take advantage of today's pervasive multicore architecture processors , , or of the computational power of modern graphics processing units (gpus) . test procedures for gnss software receivers were addressed in , and a general discussion about the architecture is found in . in , ferna´ndez prades et al. advocate the use of design patterns for the implementation of gnss software receivers. carrier phase measurements and clock steering are discussed in .

today, there are solutions available at academic and commercial levels, usually not only including programing solutions but also the development of dedicated rf front ends. as examples, we can mention the gnss softare navigation receiver (gsnrx) developed by the posiion, location, and navigation (plan) group of the university of calgary , the ipexsr, a multifrequency (gps c/a and l2c, egnos and giove a e1 e5a) softare receiver developed by the institute of geodesy and navigation at the university faf munich , or n gene, a fully software receiver developed by the istituto superiore mario boella (ismb) and politecnico di torino that is able to process in real time the gps and galileo signals broadcast on the l1/e1 bands, as well as to demodulate the differential corrections broadcast on the same frequency by the egnos system. this receiver is able to process in real time more than 12 channels, using a sampling frequency of approximately 17.5 mhz with 8 b/sample .

regarding observable processing and data manageent, the gps toolkit (gpstk) , is an open source project that provides a gnss computing suite to the satellite navigation community, consisting of a core libary, accessory libraries, and some applications. it is also worthwhile to mention the navigation package for earth observation satellites (napeos) software , used by the navigation support office (ops gn) at the european space operations center (esoc) since january 2008 for all its international gnss service (igs) activities .

the techniques of digital signal processing play an imortant role in the design and implementation of a gnss receiver. in fact, gnss signals are generally very weak. the receiver thermal noise is dominant over the useful signal in space (sis), and other signals, such as interfernce and multipath, often impair the weak and fragile linef sight (los) sis received. since only the los sis contains the fundamental information about the propaga tion delay indicated in (1), the main receiver task is to adopt suitable techniques of statistical signal processing with the aim of isolating only the contribution carried out by the los sis from the received signal. the received signal introduced in (3) can be rewritten as

rrf;iðtþ þ nðtþ þ (cid:9)ðtþ

where nsv is the number of satellites in view, rrf;iðtþ is the received sis belonging to the ith satellite, nðtþ is the thermal noise modeled as a white gaussian random proess while (cid:9)ðtþ includes all the interfering signals at the receiver antenna. the signals transmitted by gps, galileo, as well as compass, have a code division multiple access (cdma) format, and glonass has also planned to emloy cdma in the future. for these systems, the received signal rrf;iðtþ, after downconversion from rf to intermeiate frequency (if) and adc can be rewritten in terms of doppler shift as

and ts is the inverse of the sampling frequency fs, pr is the received power, (cid:5)p is the propagation delay, fif is the nominal if frequency of the receiver front end, 'if is a random phase, and fd is a frequency shift, which includes both the doppler shift due to the relative motion between the satellite and the vehicle and the drift of the local oscillator. in general, fd varies with time and should be written as fdðntsþ, but in most applications, it can be considered as a constant. this is because the signal proessing operations performed by the receiver generally involve data segments where fd does not vary significantly. the symbol cbðtþ denotes the signal associated with the pseudorandom noise (prn) code of the ith satellite moduated by a subcarrier when present. the navigation mesage is carried by the signal dðtþ. notice that a subscript i should be inserted in the symbols (signals and parameters) in rifðntsþ to take into account the fact that they refer to the ith satellite, but the subscript has been omitted here to simplify the notation.

the adc introduces a quantization on the if discrete time signal. most mass market receivers introuce a 1 b or a 2 b quantization, but with the advent of sdr technology an 8 b quantization is preferred. the main reason is that the digital signal can be better seen (45)

(47) in this case as a floating point discrete time sequence, for which the results of the digital signal processing and statistical signal analysis theories can be easily applied. for this reason, in this section, the if digital signal will be written as

where the term wif½n(cid:3) represents a single realization of a random process wif½n(cid:3), which models the digital version of the continuous time filtered noise at the input of the adc block. in most applications, wif½n(cid:3) can also include the contributions of the other satellites (all the satellites in view except the ith one). this is possible because a cdma signal behaves like white noise within the front end bandwidth, but the correctness of this model should be verified case by case. if interference, multipath, and other disturbing signals are also considered the model in (48) should be modified.

in the gnss community, the contribution due to noise is characterized by the carrier to noise ratio, generally expressed in dbhz, defined as

where pr is the signal power evaluated on the whole signal bandwidth, while n0 can be considered as the noise power evaluated over a bandwidth of 1 hz, or, in other terms, the noise power density.

the first task of a gnss receiver is to detect the preence or absence of a generic satellite. this is done by the so called acquisition system, which also provides a coarse estimation of two sis parameters: the frequency shift of the nominal if frequency, and a delay term which allows the receiver to create a local code aligned with the incomng code. since the code is periodic, this means that this delay (cid:5) is a fraction of the code period. the task of the acquisition system is to provide an estimate ^(cid:5) ðaþ of (cid:5) ðaþ and ^f of fd. these estimated parameters are then fed to d the receiver tracking blocks, which represent the second stage of the signal processing unit with the aim of performing a local search for accurate estimates of (cid:5) and fd. in this stage, the estimation of the carrier phase may also be included. once the signals of the detected satellites are tracked, the navigation message can be demodulated, the pseudoranges can be measured, and the position, velocity, and time (pvt) can be evaluated. this is possible because the information on the propagation delay (cid:5)p still remains within the navigation message dðtþ. implemented simultaneously. two mathematical discilines govern the operations performed by an acquisition system: signal detection theory and estimation theory.

by exploiting the concepts and the methodology of the estimation theory, it is possible to show that the maximumikelihood (ml) estimate of the vector p ¼ ð(cid:5); fdþ, whose elements are two unknowns of yif½n(cid:3), is obtained by maximizing the function

where l is the number of samples in the summation, and (cid:3)rif½n(cid:3) is a test signal, locally generated, of the type

where (cid:3)(cid:5) and (cid:3)fd are test variables, defined in a proper support dp, which contain all the possible values that can be assumed by the elements of p ¼ ð(cid:5); fdþ. the summation in (49) is an inner product, known as cross ambiguity funcion (caf). in fact, by writing the summation in (49) as

the structure of an ambiguity function can be clearly recognized. the result of (49) holds only if the energy of the test signal (cid:3)r½n(cid:3) does not depend on (cid:3)p ¼ ð(cid:3)(cid:5); (cid:3)fdþ. a proof of this result can be found in , where it is also shown that (49) is not sensitive to the phase term 'if, from which the name noncoherent acquisition scheme is taken, used to identify an acquisition engine based on (49). finally, noice that the presence of data bits can impair the estimation process if not properly taken into account.

the caf is also used to decide if a specific satellite is in

view or not. the decision variable

is compared against a threshold (cid:10)t to test two possible hypotheses (49)

(52) if smax > (cid:10)t, the satellite is declared present, otherwise it is considered absent. the performance of the detector is evaluated in terms of detection probability pd ¼ pðsmax > (cid:10)tjh1þ and false alarm probability pfa ¼ pðsmax > (cid:10)tjh0þ. notice that if different strategies are used to perform the detection, the two probabilities pd and pfa should be deined differently. this topic is dealt with in . other strategies are also possible. for example, in , a method based on bayesian sequential detection is described.

the caf evaluation is generally very time consuming, as a huge matrix of points has to be evaluated before applying the estimation and detection processes. one way to reduce the complexity of these operations is to adopt the so called serial search. with this approach the sequence of the two operations (caf evaluation and detection) is interrupted the first time a value crosses the threshold (cid:10)t. this is a suboptimal method, as it does not guarantee to obtain the ml solution, based on the caf maximum. nonetheless, it is evident that this approach is much faster. other methods exist based on block processing techniques, which allow the evaluation of an entire row or column of the caf matrix in a single shot. these methods exploit some interesting properties of the caf. in fact, if the signals involved in (51) are grouped appropriately, the presence of either a correlation or a fourier transform inside the caf structure becomes evident. as a conseuence, it is clear that the fast fourier transform (fft), the most famous signal processing algorithm, can play a key role in speeding up the caf evaluation. in fact, both the discrete time fourier transform and the correlation can be implemented with very efficient and fast algorithms based on fft.

as previously anticipated, it is the task of the tracking blocks to fine estimate the code delay (cid:5) and frequency shift fd. this objective is performed by synchronizing the code and the carrier of the received signal with local generated signals. although this task could potentially be pursued working with the caf on a bi dimensional space, in conentional receivers this signal alignment is obtained by means of two mono dimensional algorithms:

the code delay synchronization is performed by means of delay lock loops (dlls); the frequency shift synchronization is obtained by means of frequency lock loops (flls) or the whole carrier phase is recovered by means of phase lock loops (plls).

the operations of the fll, pll, and dll are regulated by the same functioning and they differ only on the signal which is to be synchronized. the dll needs to operate on a signal where the carrier is wiped off in order to process a clean prn sequence, while fll and pll require a signal where the code is wiped off.

wipe off and synchronization can be done by means of a concatenated scheme, as shown in fig. 2, where two wiping systems are coupled together and linked to the estimators of code delay and frequency shift. at each iteration the estimators provide fresh estimates of frequency shift and code delay to the wiping systems, which progressively improve the quality of the signals at their outputs.

the fine synchronization of the code can be obtained by using the fundamental properties of the prn code correlation function. correlation is an even function which assumes its maximum only when the signal and its replica are perfectly aligned, and therefore, the synchronization issue becomes a maximization problem. moreover, recaling that the derivative of a function is null at a minimum and maximum value, the problem can be transformed again to become a problem of null searching. similar coniderations are also valid for the fine estimation of the frequency shift.

this is why dll, fll, and pll are generally referred to as null seeker systems. in fact, their main purpose is to find a zero, and this null search is pursued in an iterative way. at each iteration, the correlation function is evalated, and transformed, if necessary, in another function without altering the position of the maximum. the next step is the evaluation of a derivative (appropriately aproximated), and the search of its zero point. the loop is closed by applying a low pass filter in order to reduce the contribution of the noise from the measurement as much as possible without limiting the reactivity of the loop.

although null seeker schemes are well established, the search for the optimal discrimination function in gnss applications is not over yet. in fact, the performances of the tracking loops greatly depend on the shape of the corelation function, and, as a consequence, on the discrimnation function being adopted. two key performance parameters for the tracking loops are:

tracking jitter that characterizes the quality with which the signal is synchronized over the time; • multipath rejection or the error committed by the loop when the signal is received over multiple directions of arrival.

several proposals can be found in the literature for the discriminator function, which aim to reduce jitter and to increase the capability to reject multipaths. an imporant aspect to be taken into account in the definition of these functions is the innovation introduced by the preence of boc subcarriers in the new gnss signals. these subcarriers lead to narrower main peaks and introduce side lobes, as seen in fig. 3(a), which shows three autoorrelation functions obtained with ideal waveforms: a rectangular chip for a gps c/a signal, a boc(1,1) and a boc(10,5). these characteristics are very robust and can be also observed in the real signals, as shown in fig. 3(b), where the cross correlation between a local ideal code and the incoming signal is drawn in the presence of noise (c=n0 ¼ 42 dbhz) and front end filtering. a complete functions description of associated to the new autocorrelation functions is beyond the scope of this paper; some examples can be found in .

inertial navigation has a long history, beginning between the world wars i and ii and evolved principally for military purposes, namely for the guidance of rockets, spacecrafts, guided missiles, and then civil aircrafts.

inertial navigation is based on two families of inertial sensors: accelerometers and gyroscopes. three orthogonal accelerometers rigidly mounted on a body provide meaurements of acceleration in a 3 d frame. formally, casaded integrations over time of such measurements yield a measure of the instantaneous velocity and position of the body itself. however, as long as the accelerometers fig. 3. comparison of correlation functions. (a) ideal autocorrelation functions of gps c/a code, boc(1,1) and boc(10,5). (b) cross correlation functions for gps c/a and galileo boc(1,1) signals, in presence of noise (c=n0 ¼ 42 dbhz) and front end filtering.

are rigidly attached to the body in movement (strapdown system), their reference frame is the body frame (i.e., a frame integral with the body), which is usually meaningess in order to provide an indication of the body moveent with respect to an external reference frame (e.g., the earth). therefore, the angular rotation of the body with respect to the external reference frame (attitude), must be computed from the instantaneous angular orientation of the body. this is obtained by integrating the instantaneous turn rate the body is subject to, meaured by three gyroscopes rigidly mounted on the body along the orthogonal accelerometers axes. thereby, the attitude information is used to resolve the accelerometer measurements into the external reference frame , . a set of inertial sensors (accelerometers and gyrosometimes a magnetometer and/or an copes, plus altimeter) forms an inertial measurement unit (imu). the imu coupled with a computational unit to resolve the system mechanization is an inertial navigation system (ins). a comprehensive treatment of strapdown inss can be found in , , and .

the goal of integrating inss with gnss is to take advantage of the complementary characteristics of the two systems. the rate of the solution output by an ins is usually higher than that offered by a gnss receiver. inss experience relatively low noise solutions, but they tend to drift over time. the reason is the fact that body position and velocity are obtained from double and single integraion, respectively, of acceleration measurements; simiarly, angular rotations are obtained from turn rate integration. therefore, the errors on the ins estimated trajectory are potentially unbounded. for these reasons, ins performance strongly depend on the quality of the sensors, in terms of bias on accelerometers and gyroscopes and noise. on the other hand, a gnss receiver produces a solution affected by an error always bounded by the charcteristics of the receiver itself, but with an error variance prone to the propagation nuisances, as discussed in the previous sections; furthermore, in particular conditions, the satellite signals could be unavailable for the receiver (e.g., in urban canyons, tunnels, under dense foliage, under water, etc.), thus causing an outage of the solution. additionally, opposite to inss, gnsss are sensitive to jamming. the final goal of integrating the two systems is, therefore, to improve their performance in those condiions when one system alone would fail to work, or would work with poor performance.

the literature identifies three conceptual approaches for integrating ins based positioning and gnss based positioning (system hybridization): 1) loose integration; 2) tight integration; and 3) ultratight integration. these solutions differ for the degree of integration of the two systems, i.e., for the nature of the information extracted from the two systems and used in the hybridization proess, as well as for the architecture of their interactions. system hybridization is basically a mathematical matter, usually stated through a state space model and resolved with a kalman filter (kf), in one of its several variants . although other mathematical tools for the sysem hybridization can be envisaged (e.g., open loop batch/ sequential processing , particle filtering , , neural networks ), the kf is historically and concepually the principal approach, thanks to its ability to blend different sources of noisy measurements in a single statepace description of the system evolution. the most common approach cited in the literature relies on an incremental state space model associated to an extended kf (ekf) algorithm. the states are defined as the difference (increment) between the true state (what we need to estimate) and a nominal evolution of the states (nominal trajectory), determined in some independent way. (cid:2)x½n þ 1(cid:3) ¼ %½n(cid:3)(cid:2)x½n(cid:3) þ w½n(cid:3)

where (cid:2)½n þ 1(cid:3) is the incremental state vector at time n þ 1, %½n(cid:3) is the state transition matrix, which relates the states at the time n to the states at the time n þ 1, and w½n(cid:3) is the time uncorrelated model noise, with known statistics. the state vector (cid:2)½n(cid:3) typically contains, at least , : the 3 d incremental position (i.e., the correcions vector to be applied to the nominal body position at the instant n); the 3 d incremental velocity; the increental attitude; the vector of the accelerometers' biases; the vector of the gyroscopes' biases; and, possibly, the reeiver clock's bias and drift. note that this basic structure sums up to 17 1 d states.

the state transition matrix %½n(cid:3) rules the joint evoluion of the states, so it is written in terms of direction cosine matrices (from the body reference frame to the inertial one), angular rotation matrices, effects of the graitational and centripetal accelerations, and the matheatical models of the inertial sensor biases and drifts . the measurement equation of the ekf has the usual

where (cid:2)z½n(cid:3) is the incremental observation vector and h½n(cid:3) is the observation matrix. the term n½n(cid:3) is an additive noise component with know statistical properties. (cid:2)z½n(cid:3) is defined as the difference between a vector of measureents taken from the real system and a vector of nominal measurements extracted from the nominal state trajectory. in gnss ins hybridization, the nominal state trajectory is due to the ins , . however, the kind of system observables contained in the vector (cid:2)z½n(cid:3) vary with the integration architecture, as well asvconsequentlyvthe structure of the observation matrix h½n(cid:3) and the statistics of the measurement noise n½n(cid:3).

a. loose integration

in a loosely integrated architecture, the gnss receiver and the ins act as independent navigation systems. their navigation solutions (body position and velocity) are then blended in order to obtain a better estimate of the body trajectory. the conceptual block diagram of a loosely coupled architecture is shown in fig. 4. the system obervables are the body positions and velocities as comuted, separately, by the ins and the gnss receiver. their difference is taken so as to define the observation vector of the ekf; therefore, six 1 d variables define the vector (cid:2)z½n(cid:3) (the so called nominal measurements are repreented by the ins predicted position and velocity). note (53)

(54) fig. 4. block diagram for a gnss ins loosely integrated architecture.

that this vector can be computed only when both trajectory solutions are available; but typically the solution rate of the ins is higher than that of the gnss receiver. furthermore, in case of gnss outage due to environmental conditions (e.g., indoor navigation) the gnss solution could be unvailable for relatively long periods of time. in such cases the navigation could be demanded to the ins only.

a tightly integrated system uses the pseudorange and pseudorange rate information extracted from the gnss receiver to compute the corrections to be applied to the trajectory estimated by the ins computer and to estimate, if necessary, the biases that affect the accelerometers and the gyroscopes. the gnss information is used as a refineent of the ins information, so as to counteract the inrinsic derivation of the ins solution, correcting the ins trajectory. the architecture of a tight integration is repreented in fig. 5: the ins predicted trajectory is employed to predict the pseudoranges of all visible satellites, then providing the nominal measurements. thus, the ekf uses the differences in pseudoranges and pseudorange rates for each visible satellite as its observations; in this way, the information available to bound the ins errors is in some sense proportional to the number of satellites in view.

c. ultratight integration

ultratight hybridization architectures are a more reent technology, on which different approaches may coexist and confront (e.g., ). in ultratight hybriization, gnss and ins interact at the bloop filter level,[ computing the runtime corrections of the doppler freuency and code phase by means of the hybridization filter, thus refining (or even replacing) the pll's and dll's estimations. this approach promises to improve the reeiver performance in tracking the signal dynamics at the antenna and to be robust is case of fading, strongly atteuated signals, high dynamics, and even gnss outages, thanks to the additional information provided by the ins , , , .

the underlying idea is to predict the signal observed at a certain stage of the receiving chain (typically, after the correlators stage) using an ins based prediction of the receiver motion to estimate the doppler frequency. coherent ultratight architectures measure the received sigal on the in phase and quadrature output of each chanel's prompt correlator, plus, sometimes, the early and late ones , , . noncoherent architectures, on the other hand, observe either the output of the code and carrier/phase discriminators or the received pseudoranges , offering a way to realize ultratight hybridization using a microelectromechanical systems (mems) based imu . the blending filter then predicts the amount of doppler frequency shift the signal currently experiences, thereby aiding the pll and the dll in tracking the signal even in high noise/high fading/high dynamics conditions. additional states may be the signal amplitude, the code phase tracking error, the phase tracking error, the freuency tracking error, and the frequency rate error of the numerically controlled oscillator . an innovative arhitecture where the usual ekf is replaced by a square root cubature kalman filter has been recently proposed in .

vi i. mass market perspecti ve

the growing need for ubiquitous positioning and navigaion to serve the banywhere, anytime[ needs of the conumer, the lbs and the its markets will strongly influence future mass market receiver architectures. banywhere, anytime[ navigation requirements will favor architectures that can deal with a large variety of position related inforation. rather than relying on just one signal type for navigation, future receivers may need to scan through the universe of potentially available position information sources (e.g., a multiplicity of gnss systems, but also wireless communication systems and imus), and dynamcally choose those that are available at its current location and time. satellite positioning is expected to pervade most of portable devices, enabling an ever growing number of location aware applications for the mass market such as social networking, local search, geotagging, street map and direction finding, augmented reality, fleet position data logging, location based marketing and targeted advertising, leisure support (tourism, hiking, biking, etc.), messaging, or microblogging. this shift from dedicated devices and applications to blocation as an embedded feature[ will result in an integrated environment where location experience becomes ubiquitous, seamless, and transparent to the user. gnss receivers are becoming a standard feature not only on medium high end mobile phones, but also on other portable devices such as digital cameras and portable gaming consoles. mobile positioning for e911 and e112 emergency services is becoming more pervasive, and a plethora of user applications based on mobile location is rapidly emerging. an example could be apple's iphone (and its associated operating system ios): each version adds new navigation capabilities with respect to the previous one. wifi positionng, cellular tower triangulation, gps, and compass were added in this order in successive iphone versions. bestselling applications are related to navigation, and they are not the cheapest . this enhancement of lbs capabilities has resulted in a rapid settlement in the smartphone market.

this poses challenges to the whole value chain: reearchers, chipset manufacturers, device vendors, map data providers, application stores, developers, and mobile operators. the impact of interoperability, gnss based management of the wireless network infrastructure from the perspective of network capacity and quality of service, location in social networks, and privacy issues are aspects to be further analyzed.

the hugely wide variety of application fields for gnss mentioned above pushes mass market gnss receivers to face an increasing demand for higher positioning availbility and accuracy particularly in urban and indoor environments, where gnss signals are greatly attenuated or even blocked. the answer to this challenge is coming from two technologies that faced an explosive developent in the last ten years: high sensitivity1 (hs) gnss and assisted gnss. their adoption has substantially improved the performance of gnss receivers operating in critical propagation environments and has also become a common feature in commercial low end receivers. assisted gnss, for example, is offered today on most commercial generalurpose gps chips. other augmentation techniques, less standardized and still farther from being widely employed in mass market devices, may exploit, for example, the information extracted from inertial sensors, odometers, barometric altimeters, vision, wifi localization, and ultraideband ranging , . although commercial grade indoor navigation can be currently handled with a techology mix (usually blending gnss with cellular, rfid, inertial sensors, and wireless communication technoloies), there is still a lack of well established procedures and standards for positioning in environments with no los within the receiver and the satellites, and it constiutes an active field of research and development.

the nominal minimum gps signal strength for a user on the earth surface and with unobstructed visibility to the satellite is defined as (cid:2)130 dbm for the c/a code . this level is increased to (cid:2)127 dbm for galileo e1 . los obstructions may attenuate the received power by about 5 db in cars, up to 20 db in buildings, and more that 25 db in subterranean garages , severely degrading the signal processing performance of the receiver.

hs receivers are recognized to have brevolutionized the gps receiver market[ by extending the gps service availability and allowing integration of gps chips into personal handsets, such as mobile phones, equipped with cheap and low performing antennas. for years, most providers have sold hs receivers that acquire signal below (cid:2)150 dbm, although the high sensitivity regime should be assumed to refer to signal levels of (cid:2)155 dbm and below .

weak signals, attenuated by windows, walls, roofs, furiture, foliage, and so on, usually undergo further impairents, typical in urban canyons and indoor conditions: multipath, cross correlation false locks, and the squaring losses , . the fundamental approach to deal with such problems is increasing the coherent signal integration time, as the signal to noise ratio of weak signals is expected to improve proportionately to the coherent integration time. in particular, a coherent integration time of several seconds would mitigate the main indoor impairments.

hs receivers usually extend the coherent integration time up to the length of one gps navigation data bit, corresponding to a time of 20 ms. nonetheless, a significant gain could be expected by applying a much longer coherent integration. however, various aspects make the use of very long coherent integration difficult. apart from the data bit transitions, which occur every 20 ms in gps and every 4 ms in the data channel of galileo, and which can be predicted using assistance data from a reference station with open sky condition, the internal clock of low cost devices is typically not stable enough to provide sufficient jitter accuracy for generating the local replica of the code and carrier. therefore, a stable oscillator, e.g., an ocxo, is necessary to reduce oscillator jitter to acceptable values .

today, typical values of achievable signal acquisition sensitivity for gps c/a can be set to around (cid:2)157 dbm or 17 dbhz, assuming a (cid:2)174 dbm/hz noise power density. these values have been found by pany et al. using an experimental setup claimed to be brepresentative of the state of the art in the year 2010,[ based of the ifen intrack asic and the sx navigation software receiver. on the other hand, nominal values of acquisition and tracking sensitivity for three commercial hs receivers are reported in table 1. a very challenging aspect in increasing sensitivity via long coherent integrations, however, is the reproduction of the user motion with accuracy high enough to compensate the nonlinear dynamics on the pseudorange and the doppler frequency. various approaches proposed in the literature, which are likely to be more suitable to high end/professional receivers, are based on vector tracking , . vector based tracking architectures aim at improving the signal tracking performance of gnss receivers by using the position, velocity, and clock estiates from the navigation filter to predict the signal charcteristics from each satellite (code phase and doppler frequency). in this way, the receiver can better predict the incoming signal characteristics, thereby allowing the use of a narrower tracking loop bandwidth. the narrower bandidth then reduces the amount of noise entering the trackng loops and allows the vector based receiver to track weaker signals in challenging signal environments. examples of such an approach are reported in and . an architecture that couples both long (noncoherent) integraions and high sensitivity tracking loops is proposed in . increasing receiver sensitivity and service availability, as well as coverage, for mass market applications is atracting so much interest that even more bfuturistic[ aproaches are deserving particular attention nowadays. one of such innovative approaches, particularly promising in terms of performance, is the so called peer to peer posiioning (p2p). p2p assumes the existence of a wireless point to point mobile network, where nodes (users) can exchange position related data, in order to perform coopeative positioning and/or timing. a typical situation where p2p positioning could be foreseen is a vehicular ad hoc network (vanet) , . the wireless technology enabling the implementation of such a network is expected to be the wireless access in vehicular environment (wave), a communication standard designed for rapidly changing propagation environments and also where very short duration short range data exchanges are required.

cooperative positioning methods can be classified in two families: methods based on the exchange of gnss data only among peers and hybrid methods, based on both gnss data and other positioning measurements (e.g., terestrial ranging, inertial sensors, odometers, etc.). in the context of exchanging gnss data only, several procedures can be envisaged to implement the concept of p2p posiioning. a first class of p2p procedures refers to techniques related to the physical layer of the signal (in particular, aided acquisition approaches, such as and ). other techniques work at the pseudorange layer (pvt computation) and exploit the position computed by the aiding peers to evaluate the position of the aided peer . finally, the peers in open sky condition can behave as pseudosatellites, which can be used by the target peer to fix its position. interestingly, these methods feature beneits with respect to the usual assistance approaches (e.g., a gnss, hs standalone gnss receivers), thanks to the vicinity of the peers involved in the cooperation and, at the same time, to the diversity provided by the physical separation of the involved receivers .

today, location is also a key aspect in fields such as aviation , its (addressing the problems of good tracebility and tracking, road safety, pollution, and congesion), and high precision applications such as precision agriculture, time transfer, or surveying. dramatic improveents of performance are envisaged in the following years, continuing to spin the circle of science, technology, and business around navigation.

vi ii . conclusion

the modernization of existing gnsss and the advent of new ones dramatically change the landscape of civil positioning systems, enabling new applications and business models but posing challenges in the design of receivers able to fully exploit the available signals. this paper described satelliteased navigation systems and signals, augmentation systems, and receiver technology that will play an important role in future positioning systems, from a mass market perspective. we also identified further research topics in the design of multiconstellation, multifrequency, high sensitivity receiers, and the integration and interoperability with other technologies, such as inertial navigation systems and wireless, ground based communication technologies. h

the authors would like to thank a. ordenes and

m. mcintosh for their manuscript review.

s. bancroft, ban algebraic solution of

the gps equations,[ ieee trans. aerosp. electron. syst., vol. 21, no. aes 1, pp. 56 59, jan. 1985. a. arago´n a´ngel, p. r. bosch, j. samson, m. tossaint, m. albertazzi, d. odijk, p. j. g. teunissen, p. de bakker, s. verhagen, and h. van der marel, bwide area rtk. high precision positioning on a continental scale,[ inside gnss, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 35 46, mar./apr. 2010.

f. van diggelen, a gps: assisted gps, gnss,

and sbas. norwood, ma: artech house, 2009.

t. kadoyama, n. suzuki, n. sasho, h. iizuka,

g. artaud, l. ries, j. dantepal, j. l. issler, t. grelier, a. delatour, o. julien, and c. macabiau, bcboc performances using software receiver,[ in proc. 2nd workshop gnss signals signal process., noordwick, the netherlands, apr. 2007, pp. 1 12. p. paimblanc, w. chauvet, d. bonacci, t. sadiki, and f. castanie´, bimproved positioning using gsm and gnss tight hybridization,[ in proc. eur. navig. conf. global navig. satellite syst., toulouse, france, apr. 2008, pp. 1 7.

algorithms and strategies for wireless sensor networks. hershey, pa: information science reference (igi global), 2009. m. s. grewal, l. r. weill, and a. p. andrews, global positioning systems, inertial navigation, and integration, 2nd ed. hoboken, nj: wiley, 2007.

h. hurskainen, e. s. lohan, j. nurmi, s. sand, c. mensing, and m. detratti, boptimal dual frequency combination for galileo mass market receiver baseband,[ in proc. ieee workshop signal processing syst., tampere, finland, oct. 2009, pp. 261 266.

d. akos, ba software radio approach to r. g. brown and p. y. c. hwang,

introduction to random signal and applied kalman filtering, 3rd ed. new york: wiley, 1997.

g. gao and g. lachapelle, ba novel

architecture for ultra tight hsgps ins integration,[ j. global position. syst., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 46 61, 2008.

s. alban, d. akos, s. rock, and

d. gebre egziabher, bperformance analysis and architectures for ins aided gps tracking loops,[ in proc. inst. navig. nat. tech. meeting, anaheim, ca, jan. 2003, pp. 611 622.

s. r. babu, bultra tight integration of

gps/pseudolites/ins: system design and performance analysis,[ ph.d. dissertation, schl. survey. spatial inf. syst., the univ. new south wales, sydney, n.s.w., australia, 2006.

m. g. petovello and g. lachapelle,

bcomparison of vector based software receiver implementations with application to ultra tight gps/ins integration,[ in proc. 19th int. tech. meeting sat. div. inst. navig., fort worth, tx, sep. 2006, pp. 1790 1799.

d. li and j. wang, bperformance analysis

of the ultra tight gps/ins integration based on an improved kalman filter design for tracking loops,[ in proc. int. global navig. satellite syst. symp., surfers paradise, australia, jul. 2006, doi: 10.1.1.71.6874.

j. wang and d. li, bsystem design

and performance analysis of extended kalman filter based ultra tight gps/ins integration,[ in proc. ieee/ion position location navig. symp., san diego, ca, apr. 2006, pp. 291 299, doi: 10.1109/ plans.2006.1650615.

m. petovello, c. o'driscoll, and

g. lachapelle, bweak signal carrier tracking using extended coherent integration with an ultra tight gnss/imu receiver,[ in proc. eur. navig. conf. global navig. satellite syst., toulouse, france, apr. 2008, pp. 1 11.

b. chan and m. petovello, bcollaborative vector tracking of gnss signals with ultra wideband augmentation in degraded signal environments,[ in proc. ion int. tech. meeting, san diego, ca, jan. 2011, pp. 404 413.

h. niedermeier, b. eissfeller, j. winkel,

t. pany, b. riedl, t. wo¨rz, r. schweikert, s. lagrasta, g. lo´pez risuen˜o, and d. jime´nez ban˜os, bdingpos: high sensitivity gnss platform for deep indoor scenarios,[ in proc. int. conf. indoor position. indoor navig., zu¨rich, switzerland,