satellite networking integration in the 5g ecosystem: research trends and open challenges integration of satellite and 5g networks

luca boero, roberto bruschi, franco davoli, mario marchese, and fabio patrone

digital object identifier: 10.1109/mnet.2018.1800052 in order to enable this deep integration between satellite and 5g, a number of actions should be underaken to bring state of the art satellite technologies closer to the virtualization paradigm used within the 5g architecture. many issues are related to physical layer aspects.

depending on the user's policies and current status of the network; the control plane, aimed at computing and enforcing forwarding rules to a number of data forwarding nodes in order to properly route traffic flows; and the data plane, composed of the nodes of the underlying netork infrastructure, whose only purpose is to forard the incoming traffic flows by following the given rules.

the aim of nfv is to decouple network funcions from dedicated physical devices, making it possible to run such functions on general purose servers that could be deployed in network operators' data centers. in this way, more precise hardware resource allocation and sharing can be achieved, implementing virtual network functions (vnfs) on virtual machines and assembling and chaining vnfs to create services.

these new concepts can also be employed in

satellite communication networks, allowing: • intelligent delivery and deployment of new services in a flexible and programmable way • decreased energy consumption, by virtualizng the functions performed by the ground segment of the satellite infrastructure and consolidating/activating/deactivating them on remote data centers

capital expenditure (capex) decrease by exploiting general purpose hardware compoents to deploy virtualized functions

last but not least, the flexible embedding of satellite networking functionalities in the cretion and dynamic adaptation of network slices, along with the required resource proisioning at the level of the satellite network operator (sno) sdn and virtualization for broadband satellite networks were investigated in . this was one of the first studies to include a vision of how sdn and nfv concepts could be employed in satelite networks. the authors proposed a network architecture based on geostationary earth orbit (geo) satellite communications. reconfigurable broadband satellite networks were also the focus of the research work in , where a strategy was developed to deal with the problem of resource management based on a functional architecture composed of virtualized functions distributed throughout the network. reference proposed a joint placement of controllers and gateways in an sdn enabled 5g satellite integrated network. an sdn/nfv based framework for integrated satellite terrestrial communication networks called service was considered in , which exploits the centralized control of sdn to suggest a strategy to distribute the three planes of the sdn paraigm in the various network nodes of a multi layr satellite network. the management plane acts as the orchestrator of the overall network in the satellite network management center (snmc). the control plane is divided into two parts: the space part, dealt with by the space controller in geo satellites, and the terrestrial part, in charge of the terrestrial controllers implemented inside data centers and satellite gateways (sgws). the data plane is also divided into space and terrestril parts, and is composed of medium earth orbit (meo) and low earth orbit (leo) satellites, sgws, and other intermediate terrestrial nodes, such as sdn switches. the network topology may change during the network lifetime due to leo and meo satellites' motion. as a consequence, there is the need for a handover procedure to keep the flow tables of the data plane nodes updated, performing new rule computations when needed. satellite networkware deployment and optimization mechanisms vertical applications

oss/bss network slices as a service

other transport layer vnfm

vnfm multiple nfv services including the satellite ones

vertical application components deployed in network data centers

other network layer vim

pnf backhauling/ backhauling/ transport networks transport networks

virtualization degree of satellite networks

might be reconfigured to route traffic toward the new gateways.

other open issues regard real time monitoring and resource constraints, which are not limited to the widely investigated geo and leo scenarios. in the past few years, new kinds of satellites, such as cubesats, have been attracting the attention of a large number of companies and universities, thanks to their lower costs and shorter deployent. the size and weight of these satellites are much lower compared to geo and leo, but they suffer from very strict constraints about, for examle, available energy, storage capacity, and comutational power. these variables, among others regarding the status of the satellites in contact with the sgws, should be monitored and conrolled in the resource allocation process. at the same time, they make the provision of slices more time dependent. to cope with the dynamic satelite features, slice provision and adaptation should be performed along with real time monitoring of performance parameters and resource availability. proposed solutions with reference to the 3gpp, the european teleommunications standards institute (etsi) nfv management and orchestration (mano, http:// www.etsi.org/technologies clusters/technologies/ nfv/open source mano) and etsi multi access edge computing (mec, http://www.etsi.org/ technologies clusters/technologies/multi acess edge computing) architectural frameworks, we can refer to the architectural elements depictd in fig. 1 to highlight the main points connected to the deployment of satellite related functionlities and their embedding as full fledged slice components. current satellite networking eleents can be seen as pnfs, providing long haul connectivity. to be integrated and orchestrated as slice components by an nfv orchestrator involved architectural elements

figure 2. roadmap for an sdn/nfv enabled satellite network.

satellite communication networks are going to play a crucial role in the 5g ecosystem, which can take advantage of their high coverage and broadcast capability to increase the number of networked users, and to improve the reliability and availability of the overall network. (c)

virtualized space segment

space segment virtualized functions: sdn control/forwarding plane, modulation, mac/llc protocols, fec

virtualized satellite terminal

sgw virtualized functions: pep, ip qos and routing, mac/llc protocols, modulation, coding, fec, mec, and content caching

sgw virtualized functions: pep, ip qos and routing, mac/llc protocols, modulation, coding, fec

ible management of service life cycle operations, including the real time monitoring of performance and other 5g kpis.

this article has surveyed the outputs of some of the main research projects and studies about the integration of satellite networks in the 5g environment, with the purpose of highlighting the current status of the research in this field. differnt architectures have already been proposed and tested, even though there are still some open challenges. we have described the open issues to be investigated before defining and standardizing an sdn/nfv based solution for satellite networks. considering the difficulties of virtualizing these networks, an architectural framework and a posible roadmap including a set of possible future steps to allow gradual virtualization starting from the satellite ground infrastructure up to onboard functionalities have been proposed.

acknowledgment this work was partially supported by the europen union's horizon 2020 research and innovaion program under the 5g ppp matilda project (grant agreement no. 761898). references j. ordóñez lucena et al., "network slicing for 5g with sdn/ nfv: concepts, architectures, and challenges," ieee comun. mag., vol. 55, no. 5, may 2017, pp. 80 87.

3gpp ts 23.501, "technical specification group services and systems aspects; system architecture for the 5g sysem; stage 2."

z. ma et al., "key techniques for 5g wireless communications: network architecture, physical layer, and mac layer perspecives," science china info. sciences, vol. 58, no. 40, apr 2015, pp. 1 2; nurlfhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11432 015 5293 yg. l. bertaux et al., "software defined networking and virtulization for broadband satellite networks," ieee commun. mag., vol. 53, no. 3, mar. 2015, pp. 54 60.