alexandre graell i amat, member, ieee, charbel abdel nour, member, ieee, and catherine douillard, member, ieee

abstract—in this paper, serially concatenated continuous phase modulation (sccpm) is considered for the uplink of satellite communications. a three step design procedure is proposed to optimize the association of the outer code and the cpm for a wide range of spectral efficiencies, ranging from 0.75 to 2.25 bit/s/hz. firstly, exit chart analysis is applied to derive general guidelines for choosing sccpm parameters. a significant result is that a high rate outer code is required to achieve good convergence threshold, given a spectral efficiency. at a second stage, union bounds to the error probability are considered to choose the outer code under the constraints arising from the exit charts analysis. from this analysis, extended bch codes and extended hamming codes are proposed as outer code for broadband and narrowband transmission, respectively. for the latter, double binary convolutional codes and symbol interleaving is also proposed as a valid alternative. finally, combining both exit charts and union bounds we optimize the association of code and cpm to achieve both low error rates and good convergence. the proposed concatenated structure offers very low error floors and good performance in the waterfall region for all considered spectral efficiencies. a significant improvement with respect to previous concatenated cpm schemes is shown.

index terms—block codes, continuous phase modulation,

exit charts, serial concatenation, union bound techniques.

n ext generation satellite services, like digital tv broad

casting, internet access as well as voice over ip, have very stringent requirements in terms of bandwidth and error rate performance . for instance, for the broadband uplink frame error rates (fers) down to 10−7 are requested, and systems will support a wide range of spectral efficiencies (0.75 − 2.25 bit/s/hz). the satellite channel is by nature noninear and band limited. in such a scenario, research focus has shifted in the past few years from classical modulations to more spectrally efficient coded modulations based on amlitude phase shift keying (apsk). apsk modulations show superior performance over nonlinear satellite channels than traditional squarer cross quadrature amplitude modulation

manuscript received august 7, 2008; revised december 15, 2008; accepted february 22, 2009. the associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was j. lu.

the authors are with the electronics department, it/telecom bretagne, cs 83818 29238 brest cedex 3, france (e mail: {alexandre.graell, charel.abdelnour, catherine.douillard}@telecom bretagne.eu).

this work was funded by the european space agency under project broadband satellite digital transmission (bsdt), contract number 19370. the material in this paper was presented in part at the ieee information theory workshop (itw), bergen, norway, july 2007. (qam) constellations and have been adopted in the current dvb s2 satellite standard .

continuous phase modulation (cpm) [3, 4] is a bandwidth and energy efficient digital modulation scheme with constant envelope, characteristic that makes it particularly appealing for band limited systems employing non linear power amplifiers, such as satellite communication systems. when a nonlinear amplifier is used, the filtered signal gives rise to significant spectral regrowth affecting the bandwidth efficiency of the system. due to its constant envelope, cpm will not suffer as much spectral regrowth when passed through a non linear amplifier as compared to the currently used multi ring contellations such as apsk. therefore, cpm is being considered for future satellite systems.

in its early years, cpm received an enthusiastic interest by the international research community. however, it has so far been applied to only a limited number of applications. more recently, the advent of turbo codes and iterative deoding techniques has sparkled a renewed interest on cpm techniques. several papers have addressed the concatenation of a forward error correcting (fec) code with cpm (sccpm) [5 7]. in a detailed analysis of the serial concatenation of outer convolutional code and inner cpm was given. upper bounds to the error probability and design criteria were also derived. the analysis in was later extended in to convolutional codes over rings and symbol interleaving, improving performance mainly in the waterfall (wf) region. most of these previous works were aimed at optimizing the outer fec to improve the power efficiency of a given cpm. while this approach has provided some insight into concateated cpm schemes, it strongly limits the consequences of the analysis, since it is limited to particular cases, which cannot be in general compared. indeed, the optimal association of coding and cpm for a given bandwidth efficiency and error rate requirements still remains an open question. in this paper we address this issue, which is of primary importance for actual applications. the main purpose is to identify structures attaining very low error rates, requested by the satellite link, while still preserving very good convergence properties for a wide range of spectral efficiencies. rather than focusing on few given cpm formats, we optimize the association of cpm and outer code to achieve these goals. to this purpose, a three step design procedure combining extrinsic information transfer (exit) charts analysis and union bound techniques is proposed to optimize the association of the outer code and the cpm parameters. similar work has been recently reported for continuous phase frequency shift keying (cpfsk) in , where the code is optimized by using exit charts. however, unlike in this paper we consider a joint approach based on bounding techniques and exit charts to optimize the codes for both the waterfall and the error floor region.

from the analysis, a serially concatenated cpm structure using short linear block codes as outer code is proposed. in particular, double error correcting extended bch (ebch) codes are proposed for broadband transmission. the proposed concatenated scheme offers very low error rates for short and medium block lengths and good convergence behavior for all spectral efficiencies. for narrowband transmission, extended hamming (ehamming) codes are proposed as outer code. they allow to improve the convergence threshold, yet satisfy error rate requirements. finally, double binary convolutional codes (ccs) combined with symbol interleaving are proposed as a valid alternative to ehamming codes for the narrowband case. a new algorithm to compute the union bound for symbol interleaved cpm, which significantly reduces its complexity, and a code optimization criterion are also given.

we consider a cpm system with m ary symbols wi = {±1, ±3, . . . , ±(m − 1)} transmitted every symbol interval t with energy es. the cpm signal can be described as :

where f0, ψ0, and w denote the carrier frequency, the initial phase shift, and the sequence of m ary symbols wi, respecively, and ψ(t, w) is the information carrying phase, given by

f (t) is the phase pulse, which is the integral of a positive normalized frequency pulse g(t). parameter h = q/p is a rational number and it is referred to as the modulation index. in it was shown that the transmitted signal does not change if ψ(t, w) is replaced in (1) by the so called tilted phase ¯ψ(t, ¯w), with (cid:4)

where l is the phase pulse length, ¯wi = , w (τ ) represents the data independent terms, and mod denotes the modulo operator. systems with l = 1 are referred to as full response systems, while systems with l > 1 are referred to as partial response systems. here, we consider quaternary raised cosine (qrc) and quaternary spectral raised cosine (qsrc) families of frequency pulses g(t) with l = {2, 3}, denoted as qlrc and qlsrc, respectively. for instance q2rc stands for quaternary l = 2 raised cosine. ( )r t

id symb. to bit

fig. 1. transmitter and receiver of serially concatenated cpm system.

using the tilted phase, the transmitted signal in the n th interval is uniquely defined by the current data symbol ¯wn, the previous data symbols ¯wn−l+1, . . . , ¯wn−1 and the accumuated phase state θn = i=0 ¯wi mod p. therefore, the cpm modulator can be decomposed into the concatenation of a continuous phase encoder (cpe) and a memoryless modulator (mm) . (cid:6)n−l

b. serially concatenated system

we consider the serially concatenated system shown in fig. 1. the information data u of length k bits is divided into j subblocks of k bits and encoded by an (n, k, dmin) linear block code, co, of rate ro = k/n. adaptation to the information block size (if k is not a multiple of k) and rate flexibility are obtained by applying the method proposed in the appendix. here, short single error correcting ehamming codes and double error correcting ebch codes are considred for co, for narrowband and broadband transmission, respectively, since, as it will be discussed later, they yield a good compromise between decoding complexity and code performance. j codewords of the outer code are concatenated to form the outer codeword v of length n , which is permuted to v(cid:3) by the interleaver π working at bit level. the binary sequence v(cid:3) is mapped on to the sequence w of m ary symbols wi, and fed to the cpe, ci.

for narrowband transmission, another encoding structure is considered as an alternative to ehamming codes, consisting of an outer binary cc with two binary inputs and four binary outputs, and symbol interleaving. since the cc encoder has two binary inputs, we shall refer to it as a double binary cc . the information data u of length k is now directly encoded by the double binary code cc of rate ro = 2/4 = 1/2. at each trellis step, the four output bits are mapped onto two quaternary symbols. to achieve higher rates, puncturing is applied at symbol level. the outer codeword v of length n = k/ro symbols is then permuted by a symbol interleaver π to w and fed to the cpe. note that for symbol interleaving the mapper in fig. 1 disappears, and v is a sequence of m ary symbols. bank which consists of pm l matched filters. at time kt , the sampled vector output of the filter bank represents a sufficient statistic needed for a ml detection [4, 5]. note that if the modulation index is a rational number (h = q/p), the cpe can be represented by a trellis with pm l−1 states. therefore, a posteriori probability decoding can be applied .

the receiver applies iterative decoding and demodulation. the decoder consists of two soft input soft output (siso) decoders do and di matched to the outer code and to the cpm modulator, respectively. in this paper, we apply ml detection of cpm signals based on the bcjr algorithm. the symbol toit and bit to symbol blocks refer to the transformation from symbol wise log likelihood ratios (llrs) to bit wise llrs and from bit wise llrs to symbol wise llrs, respectively. to decode the block code the chase pyndiah algorithm is used . it is a well known siso suboptimal algorithm for block codes with one of the best trade off between complexity and performance, especially for low error correction capability t (typically 1 or 2) where it is nearly optimal.

the spectral efficiency (se) of coded cpm can be approx

where ro is the rate of the outer code and bu is the normalized double sided uncoded bandwidth, which depends on m , l, the pulse type, and the modulation index h . here, the bandwidth is defined as 99% in band power, equivalent to the −20 db level in the fractional out of band power function . from (4), it arises that the se of a concatenated cpm is comletely defined by cpm parameters (pulse shape, modulation order, correlation length and modulation index) and the outer code rate. more precisely, given m , l, and the pulse type, the spectral efficiency is defined by the pair {h, ro}. therefore, system optimization requires the optimization of all of these parameters.

the main goal of this paper is to propose concatenated cpm structures attaining very low error rates while still preerving very good convergence properties for a wide range of spectral efficiencies. several criteria may be adopted to select a particular cpm scheme. for instance, cpm parameters could be chosen based on capacity considerations. this is the classical approach for linear modulations, where, in general, best systems are those achieving higher spectral efficiencies for a given signal to noise ratio eb/n0. in fig. 2 we show the symmetric information rate (sir) curves, expressed in bit/s/hz, versus eb/n0 for several q2rc, q3rc and q3src cpm. due to the memory effect introduced by cpm, the optimum input distribution needed for capacity computation is difficult to obtain . instead, the sir of the channel can be considered. the sir predicts the limit on the bandwidth efficiency of error free transmission and it is defined as the mutual information rate between the channel input and output when the channel input is a sequence of i.i.d. random variables with uniform distribution. it can be computed following the method proposed in . we denote by eb/n0sir the eb/n0 value required in order to achieve a particular value of the 1.75

fig. 2. schemes. symmetric information rate curves (in bit/s/hz) for several cpm

maximizing capacity is a good criterion for uncoded cpm and coded cpm with no iterative processing. however, if cpm is considered in a concatenated scheme, this criterion is not the optimal one. in this case, the performance of the concatenated system strongly depends on the association of the outer code and the cpm, which acts as the inner encoder of the concatenated system. therefore, cpm schemes with better capacity may actually perform worse than poorer schemes in terms of capacity when concatenated with an outer code.

ideally, one would be interested in the concatenated cpm scheme offering the best performance in both the wf and the error floor (ef) regions. performance in the wf region can be predicted using exit chart techniques , while design optimization in the ef can be addressed using bounding techniques . unfortunately, design criteria derived from analytical bounds and from exit charts, respectively, are in general competing rather than complementing, i.e., improving code performance in the ef region leads to a penalty in terms of convergence threshold, and vice versa. moreover, the large number of parameters to be optimized makes a joint approach prohibitively complex. therefore, a three step strategy, yet practical, is proposed here. first, exit chart analysis is applied to derive general guidelines for choosing sccpm parameters. at a second stage, union bounds to the error probability are considered to choose the outer fec under the constraints arising from the exit charts analysis. finally, combining exit charts and union bounds we optimize the association of fec and cpm to achieve both low error rates and good convergence for a wide range of spectral efficiencies.

iv. cpm parameters and code rate optimization: exit charts analysis

let ia(co) and ie(co) denote the prior and the extrinsic mutual information (mi) for the fec code. in a similar way, let ia(ci) and ie(ci) denote the prior and extrinsic mi for the cpm. ie(co) and ie(ci) can be found via separate monte carlo simulation of the two constituent codes for different values of eb/n0. ie(co) = to(ia(co)) and ie(ci) = 10

fig. 3. exit charts for two cpm schemes with se = 0.9 bit/s/hz.

ti(ia(ci), eb/n0), where to and ti denote the exit functions of co and ci, respectively. assuming infinite interleavers, the convergence threshold can be predicted by plotting the exit curves for co and ci in a single diagram.

in fig. 3 we plot the exit curves for two concatenated cpm schemes with se = 0.9 bit/s/hz. the outer code is the (64, 51, 6) ebch code. gray mapping is assumed. the solid curves correspond to q3rc with modulation index h = 2/7 and code rate r = 0.5. the dashed curves correspond to q2rc and h = 2/5. to achieve the same se, the outer code rate must be raised to r = 0.8. for q3rc, the tunnel between the two curves opens at eb/n0 = 3.1 db, indicating a convergence threshold around this value, i.e., 2.55 db from the corresponding eb/n0sir. remarkably, the convergence threshold can be significantly improved if q2rc is used instead. the convergence threshold is now at eb/n0 = 1.9 db, i.e., 1.2 db earlier. in this case, the convergence is 0.97 db away from the corresponding eb/n0sir.

the superior performance of q2rc, h = 2/5, cpm may appear to be surprising at a first glance, since its eb/n0sir is 0.38 db worse than for q3rc h = 2/7 (see fig. 2). it may then seem that for some concatenated cpm schemes we can approach capacity closer than for others. this phenomenon can be explained as follows: by fixing cpm parameters we are also fixing one constituent of the concatenated code (the inner code). furthermore, to achieve a certain se, the cpm parameters will also dictate the outer code rate. therefore, given a particular outer code (e.g., cc, ebch code, etc.) by fixing cpm parameters we are actually fixing the two components of the concatenated code (i.e., the two curves in the exit chart). in other words, cpm introduces a strong constraint on the design of the concatenated code in the sense that it is itself part of the concatenated code. it may then happen that a cpm scheme achieving higher capacity shows a poor matching of the two exit curves when considered in a concatenated scenario, thus leading to poorer convergence thresholds than cpm schemes with lower capacity. this is not the case of linear modulations, where all degrees of freedom to design the channel code are available. to achieve good convergence thresholds, a high rate outer code is always required, given the same se.

v. the choice of the outer code: union bounds

several outer codes can in principle be concatenated with cpm, such as stand alone codes (convolutional or block codes), or turbo like codes (turbo codes, serially concatenated codes (scc), ldpc, etc.). to achieve very low error rates, required for satellite communications, turbo like codes may seem to be an excellent candidate. unfortunately, they entail a significant penalty in terms of decoding convergence with respect to concatenated systems using a single outer code. this is a common behavior for three fold concatenations . therefore, in this paper we propose a serially concatenated cpm scheme using a single outer code.

a. union bound to the error probability

the ef performance of concatenated cpm systems can be analyzed by using union bound techniques for sccs [5, 16]. the frame error rate, pw(e), is upper bounded by: (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:8)

where eb is the energy per information bit and bd the number of codewords with normalized squared euclidean distance d. using the concept of uniform interleaver, bd can be computed from the weight enumerating function (wef) of the outer code, and the input output weight enumerating function (iowef) of the cpm [5, 16],

where aco are the coefficients of the wef of the outer code l ci (i.e., the number of codewords of weight l), and a l,d are the coefficients of the iowef of the cpm (i.e., the number of codewords of input weight l and normalized squared euclidean distance d).

in [5, 16] it was shown that the dominant contribution to the bound (5) for large interleaver length n is given by the term with largest exponent, αmax = max{no + ni − l − 1}, where no and ni are the number of error events of the outer code and of the inner cpm, respectively. further, in αmax (cid:10) was found to be αmax = − . αmax is usually called the interleaver gain, since it is the factor by which the error probability is decreased with the interleaver length at a given signal to noise ratio. from this result and (5 6), a basic design criterion for serially concatenated cpm schemes is the use of an outer code with high minimum distance. for code design we will distinguish two cases: broadband and narrowband transmission. (cid:9)

fig. 4. union bound to the frame error probability for q3rc, h = 1/7, se=2.25 bit/s/hz. the convergence threshold for each code is also reported above the corresponding union bound curve.

serially concatenated cpm with bit interleaving has comonly considered the use of convolutional code as outer code [5, 6]. this is a suitable choice if low code rates are envisaged or moderate error rates are required. in fact, low rate ccs show very good distance properties, hence leading to low efs. from the exit chart analysis of the previous section it turns out that very high rates are required to yield good convergence. unfortunately, high rate ccs suffer from low minimum distances, due to the heavy puncturing of the code. hence, they are not the optimal choice in such a scenario.

in this paper, we propose a concatenated structure using double error correcting short ebch codes as outer code. this scheme is inspired by the outstanding performance of serial concatenation of ebch outer code and inner accumulator . here, the cpm can be regarded as the accumulator of the serially concatenated structure. the use of ebch codes has several advantages with respect to ccs commonly used in the literature [5, 6]. first, they are excellent codes for highates, with much higher dmin than ccs of similar complexity. second, ebch codes show very good convergence properties when concatenated with an inner accumulator .

in fig. 4 we plot the bounds to the frame error probability for q3rc, h = 1/7 and five different outer codes, namely the 4, 16, 32 and 64 state ccs, and the (64, 51, 6) ebch code. the code rate is ro ∼0.8. the puncturing of the ccs was chosen to optimize its wef. due to its poor minimum distance (dmin = 2), the commonly used 4 state cc shows a very high error floor. the floor can significantly be improved by using more powerful ccs. the 16 state cc has dmin = 3, and shows a floor two decades lower. further improvements may be obtained by increasing the number of trellis states to 32 or 64, at the expense of a significant increase in complexity. both codes have dmin = 4. the union bound for the (64, 51, 6) ebch code is also plotted in the figure. this code shows the best error floor, yet satisfies the error rate requirements of broadband satellite transmission. the ebch code improves the more complex 32 state and 64 state ccs, due to its higher minimum distance, dmin = 6. codes, written over the corresponding union bound curve. as expected, increasing the constraint length of the cc entails a loss in convergence. for instance, the 64 state cc converges 0.82 db later than the 4 state cc. on the other hand, the ebch code shows a convergence threshold around 9.97 db, similar to the threshold of the 16 state cc. therefore, the use of ebch codes allows achieving very low floors, yet maintaining good convergence properties. a similar behavior was observed for other cpm parameters.

in this paper, a single ebch code, the (64, 51, 6) ebch code, is proposed as outer code for broadband transmission. it achieves a good compromise between code performance and decoding complexity. a high interleaver gain αmax = −3 is achieved thanks to its large minimum distance, dmin = 6, yet allowing very low error floors. code rate flexibility and block length adaptation is obtained applying the method described in the appendix.

c. narrowband transmissions

the error rate requirements for narrowband transmissions are significantly less stringent with respect to the broadband case. frame error rates down to 10−4 are required. in such a scenario, the strength of the outer code can be slightly relaxed to favor performance in the wf region. in this paper, we propose the use of ehamming codes for narrowband transmissions. in particular, the (32, 26, 4) and the (64, 57, 4) ehamming codes, compatible with the code rates of interest, were chosen. the use of the ehamming code as outer code allows the convergence to be improved with respect to the ebch code, while its minimum distance (dmin = 4) is high enough to achieve the target frame error rates.

vi. best sccpm schemes

the ultimate goal of this paper is to propose sccpm structures that yield good performance in both the ef and wf regions. in sections iv and v we applied exit charts analysis and union bounds to derive design rules for cpm parameters and outer code. in this section, we combine exit charts and union bounds to optimize the association of the outer code and the cpm. more precisely, for each spectral efficiency exit charts are used to devise a subset of sccpm schemes with good convergence properties, and error bounds are then applied within this subset to choose the sccpm scheme that attains the required low error rates.

in table i we report the best association of cpm parameters and outer code rate for broadband transmission and quaternary cpm for several spectral efficiencies, ranging from 0.75 to 2.25 bit/s/hz. the effective code rates obtained applying the code rate adaptation approach described in the appendix (for k = 128 bytes), and the convergence thresholds are also reported. here, with best we mean the scheme with the best convergence threshold, yet allowing to achieve low floors (fer down to 10−7). note that some sccpm can yield very good convergence but extremely bad floors. the convergence thresholds in table i were obtained for the concatenated cpm scheme with the (64, 51, 6) ebch code as outer code, bit interleaving, and gray mapping, since earlier convergence was observed with respect to natural mapping (0.3 0.6 db gain). in table ii we report the best cpm schemes using ehaming codes for narrowband transmission (se from 1.0 to 1.5 bit/s/hz). the (32, 26, 4) ehamming code was considered for se 1.0 and 1.25 bit/s/hz, while the higher rate (64, 57, 4) ehamming code was assumed for se 1.5 bit/s/hz. note that the best cpm schemes in table ii are the same of table i. the only differences are for se 1.50 bit/s/hz. in fact, these schemes are also the best ones for the broadband case, but they require the use of a higher rate ebch code (e.g. the (128, 113, 6) ebch), while we restricted ourselves to the lower complexity (64, 51, 6) ebch. the use of a different outer code has an impact on the convergence threshold, but not on the hierarchy of the cpms. also, note that the solely (64, 57, 4) ehamming code can be used for the narrowband case. it shows almost identical threshold and error floor to the (32, 26, 4) ehamming code.

vii. an alternative for narrowband transmissions: double binary convolutional codes with symbol interleaving a serially concatenated cpm scheme consisting of an outer convolutional code over rings and symbol interleaving was proposed in , with excellent performance in terms of convergence threshold. significant gains with respect to sccpm with bit interleaving were reported, at the expense of some loss in terms of error floor. the codes in were restricted to rate 1/2, and m = p. they were optimized assuming q2rc cpm.

interleaving does not allow to achieve very low error floors. this was the reason why it was discarded in the previous section for broadband transmission. however, symbol interleaving might report some gains for narrowband transmissions, where the error rate requirements are less stringent. in this section we propose the use of doubleinary ccs as outer code combined with symbol interleaving for narrowband transmissions, as an alternative to ehamming codes. here, we restrict to quaternary cpm. however, the proposed codes can be easily extended to octal cpm. in particular ccs consisting of 2 binary inputs (double binary cc) and 4 binary outputs are considered. the (unpunctured) code rate is ro = 1/2. this scheme is inspired by the one proposed in . however, it presents two main differences: the use of binary codes instead of ring codes, and the extension to any coding rate, through puncturing of the output of the cc, and to any cpm parameters. the use of binary codes allows exploiting standard design tools for ccs, while using doubleinary codes allows to apply puncturing at symbol level. note that the four binary outputs may be equivalently treated as 2 quaternary symbols. then, some of the output symbols may be punctured to achieve higher coding rates. in essence, the encoding process is done at bit level, while the puncturing and the exchange of extrinsic information between the outer code and the cpm are done at symbol level, thus preserving the advantages of symbol interleaving.

table ii best sccpm schemes. narrowband transmission.

quaternary cpm, bit interleaving h 2/7 2/7 2/7

exit charts analysis must be performed at symbol level. to this scope, the procedure described in was used. on the other hand, performance in the error floor can be estimated using union bounds to the error probability, as it was done in the previous section for bit interleaving.

let v and w be the sequence of m ary symbols at the output of the double binary (or ring) cc, and at the input of the cpm, respectively. we denote ¯l the vector with entries ¯li defining the number of non zero symbols vi (wi) in a sequence v (w). for instance, for the sequence {2, 1, 1, 2, 3, 0}, we get ¯l = {2, 2, 1}, i.e., the sequence has two symbols vi = 1, two symbols vi = 2, and one symbol vi = 3.

similarly to the binary case, the frame error rate for sccpm with symbol interleaving can be upper bounded by (5) with bd given by

co denote the number of outer code codewords ˜v where a ˜l ci of vector weight ˜l and a ˜l,d denote the number of cpm codewords generated by input sequences ˜w of input vector co weight ˜l and distance d. in a similar way we define a ¯l (7) and (7) reduces to (6). however, for symbol interleaving we need to consider both the order and the position of the nonero symbols in the sequences . as a result, the evaluation of (7) is extremely complex. in a truncated bound was proposed, based on the use of the difference trellis (supero trellis) to compute a through the ˜l super trellis is computationally demanding, especially for long constraint length codes, since the algorithm works on a trellis of 22ν states. therefore, in the computation was limited to few dominant terms.

in this section, we propose a different computation of (7) co co based on a ˜l ). in fact, an ¯l co co important observation is that a can be obtained from a . ¯l ˜l co a can be easily computed using standard wef computation ¯l methods for binary codes with the slight difference that the co wef is computed at symbol level. then, from a the ¯l co coefficients a can be obtained as follows: for each vector ˜l co ¯l such that a (cid:6)= 0, we need to consider all possible ¯l difference symbol vectors ˜l congruent1 with ¯l. note that only difference symbol vectors ˜l that lead to an error event in ˜li mod p = 0 , need to be the cpm, i.e., such that considered. following we call these sequences effective ci sequences. correspondingly, we can define a ˜leff ,d as the effective wef of the outer code and the effective iowef co of the cpm and use them in (7) in substitution of a and ˜l co a , ˜leff

ci ˜l,d. finally, for each effective sequence identified in a ci ˜leff ,d must be computed.

the evaluation of (5) and (7) can be summarized as follows: 1) compute aco using standard wef computations for ¯l linear codes. to reduce complexity, the computation of co a can be limited to a maximum number of non zero ¯l symbols |¯l|max. typically, |¯l|max = 6 to 8 is sufficient for binary codes and symbol interleaving.

(cid:6)= 0 find all possible difference symbol vectors ˜leff congruent with ¯l and derive a

ci note that the complete evaluation of a ˜leff ,d requires considerng all possible sequences of length n arising from ˜leff , which is unfeasible for very long n . to simplify the computation while still capturing the main terms of the spectrum, the permutations can be limited to a length ˜n < n . typically, ˜n = 10 to 12 can be assumed. the proposed algorithm applies to any linear code. the proposed computation is simpler and much faster than the one in , thus allowing to keep more terms of the weight spectrum. the dominant term in the error floor is the one associated with the highest exponent αmax of the interleaver size, defined as

where nin and nout are the number of concatenated simple error events in the cpm and the outer code, respectively, and |˜leff|min is the minimum effective symbol distance of the outer code, designing the minimum weight (in symbols) of an outer code sequence generating an error event in the cpm. in the minimization of αmax was proposed to list all codes achieving the highest interleaving gain. then, union bounds were computed to select the best code in terms of error floor. unfortunately, this criterion links the selection of the outer code to the cpm (note that |˜leff |min depends on both the outer code and the cpm). in other words, changing the cpm may lead to another outer code choice. further, the joint optimization of the outer code and the cpm is unfeasible.

on the other hand, one would be interested in designing a good outer code independently of the cpm, i.e., following the same approach as for scccs and for bit interleaved sccpm as in the previous sections, and later optimizing the association of the outer code and the cpm. therefore, a different optimization criterion is proposed here: we make the conjecture that maximizing |˜l|min leads to the maximization of |˜leff |min, and subsequently to the maximization of |αmax|. in the worst case we would expect values of |αmax| very close to the maximum. note that while there is no formal proof linking the maximization of |˜l|min to the maximization of |αmax|, this assumption is very likely. since |˜l|min depends only on the outer code, it is a more appealing parameter for code optiization. now, observe that maximizing |˜l|min is equivalent to maximizing |¯l|min (actually, |˜l|min = |¯l|min). therefore, we can assume the maximization of |¯l|min, and more generally co the optimization of the symbol distance spectrum a ¯l of the outer code, as the key design criterion, independently of the inner cpm.

an exhaustive search for rate 2/4 4 state, 8 state, and 16o state double binary codes was performed to optimize a . in ¯l all cases, when the outer code is concatenated with cpm, co leaded to the maximization of |αmax| in (8), optimizing a ¯l no matter of the chosen cpm parameters. this justifies the proposed design criterion and validates our conjecture. to achieve higher rates, the puncturing patterns were also selected such that a

co ¯l was optimized.

as for the bit interleaving case, we used exit chart analysis and union bounds to find the best sccpm schemes, using the double binary codes optimized according to the criterion decribed above. in table ii we report the best sccpm schemes using the best 16 state double binary code found as outer code, and symbol interleaving for narrowband transmission. note that the best schemes do not necessarily coincide with those in the same table using ehamming codes, since here symbol interleaving is used. double binary codes combined with symbol interleaving show some gains in the waterfall region (for instance the threshold for se 1.0 bit/s/hz is 0.35 db earlier compared with the best scheme using ehamming (8)

fig. 5. fer performance of serially concatenated cpm for spectral efficiencies 0.75 and 2.25 bit/s/hz. k = 128 bytes, broadband transmission.

codes and bit interleaving), and similar behavior in the ef region, as it will be shown in the next section.

viii. simulation results and complexity issues

in this section, the performance of the proposed serially concatenated cpm structure is validated through simulation. two different block sizes are for broadband transmission, considered: k = 128 bytes, compatible with one encapsulated ip packet, and a shorter block size, k = 64 bytes, for voicever ip application. for the narrowband case, only the short block size is considered. in all simulation results, random interleaving and a maximum of 30 iterations are considered. in fig. 5 we show the performance of the proposed structure for spectral efficiencies 0.75 and 2.25 bit/s/hz and k = 128 bytes (broadband transmission). the interleaver length is n = 1454 bits and n = 1298 bits for spectral efficiency 0.75 and 2.25 bit/s/hz, respectively. the performance of the best configurations in table i are reported. the proposed structure using the (64, 51, 6) ebch code as outer code achieves very low error rates. the code starts to flare around fer∼ 10−6. for comparison purposes we also report in the figure the performance for a 4 state cc , the 16 state ring cc in , as well as for a 16 state cc, 32 state cc, and 64 state cc. for all curves bit interleaving is assumed, except for the code in where symbol interleaving is used. the codes in have been properly punctured to achieve the desired code rates. the proposed structure shows significantly lower floors than the schemes with convolutional outer code, even outperforming the significantly more complex 32 state and 64 state ccs. also, for se 0.75 bit/s/hz little performance degradation in the wf region is observed (0.3 db with respect to the best code in the wf). the loss is slightly higher for 2.25 bit/s/hz, 0.7 db with respect to the code in . however, this code shows a high error floor, which is unacceptable for broadband transmission. in the same figure we also report the union bounds to the error probability for some of the considered codes. in all cases an agreement with the simulated results is observed.

in fig. 6 we report simulation results for k = 64 bytes (narowband and broadband transmission) and spectral efficiencies 1.0 bit/s/hz and 1.25 bit/s/hz. for broadband transmission the (64, 51, 6) ebch code is considered. in spite of the short block length (k = 512 bits, n = 1492 and n = 1466 r e f 10 3

for 1.0 bit/s/hz and 1.25 bit/s/hz, respectively), it allows to achieve very low error floors. the union bound to the error probability is also reported. a perfect agreement with the simulation results is observed. on the other hand, for narrowband transmission the error rate requirements are less stringent. in this case, ehamming codes are proposed. they provide some gain in the wf region (0.3 db and 0.7 db at 10−2 for se 1.0 and 1.25 bit/s/hz, respectively) while allowing to satisfy error rate requirements. the performance of the ehamming codes are similar to that of the 4 state cc and the 16 state ring code in in both the wf and the ef regions. this was also observed for other spectral efficiencies. in the same figure we report the performance of the best cpm schemes in table ii using a 16 state double binary cc and symbol interleaving. this scheme shows earlier convergence than bit interleaved cpm, while having similar performance in the floor region, as predicted from exit charts and union bound analysis.

finally, in the same figure we report simulation results to assess that the proposed schemes satisfy fer requirements for both broadband (10−7) and narrowband transmission (10−4). in particular, we plot the fer performance of serially conatenated cpm with outer ebch code and outer ehamming code using a s random interleaver with maximum spread. for narrowband transmission, the ehamming code shows a floor around 10−5. on the other hand, the ebch code allows to satisfy fer requirements of broadband transmission. no floor is observed at 10−7. 7.5 8

fig. 7. fer performance of serially concatenated cpm with full complexity and reduced complexity cpm detectors for spectral efficiencies 0.75 and 1.00 bit/s/hz. k = 64 bytes, broadband transmission.

the complexity of the sccpm receiver mainly depends on the complexity of the cpm receiver. note that the comlexity of the outer codes considered in this paper is rather low. for instance, the complexity of the (64, 51, 6) ebch decoder, when decoded using the chase pyndiah algorithm, is equivalent to that of the siso of an 8 state cc in terms of number of logic gates. moreover, high degrees of parallelism can be obtained (see e.g. ), allowing for high throughput. on the other hand, the optimal cpm receiver consists of a bank of 2m l matched filters followed by a map detector working on a trellis with pm l−1 states. for instance, the optimal detection of q3rc, h = 1/7, requires a trellis of 112 states. clearly, optimal detection is too complex for implementation purposes. in , based on the observation that most of the signal power is contained in a limited number of linearly modulated components, a simplified cpm receiver was proposed, reducing the number of trellis states to p and to pm for l = 2 and l = 3, respectively, with only a minor performance degradation with respect to the optimal map detector [21, 22]. moreover, the resulting siso is perfectly apt for parallel implementation. in fig. 7 we compare the performance of the proposed sccpm schemes with optimal cpm detector and reduced complexity cpm detector for spectral efficiencies 0.75 and 1.00 bit/s/hz. the reduced complexity detector shows a negligible degradation with respect to the full complexity detector. similar results were observed for other spectral efficiencies. in this paper, a complete analysis of serially concatenated cpm (sccpm) is provided, targeting the uplink of satellite communications. both broadband and narrowband transmisions are considered, and a wide range of spectral efficiencies are covered, ranging from 0.75 to 2.25 bit/s/hz.

a design procedure to optimize the sccpm schemes for both the error floor and the waterfall regions is proposed, based on union bound techniques and exit chart analysis. in particular, a three step design procedure is followed. first, exit chart analysis is applied to derive general guidelines for choosing sccpm parameters. at a second stage, union bounds to the error probability are considered to choose the outer code under the constraints arising from the exit charts analysis. from this analysis, extended bch codes and extended hamming codes are proposed as outer code for broadband and narrowband transmission, respectively. finally, combining both exit charts and union bounds we optimize the association of code and cpm to achieve both low eror rates and good convergence. the proposed concatenated schemes achieve very low error rates for short block lengths and good convergence behavior for the range of spectral efficiencies of interest.

furthermore, double binary ccs and symbol interleaving are proposed as an alternative to ehamming codes for the narrowband case. a fast algorithm to compute the union bound for symbol interlaved cpm and a code optimization criterion are proposed. the proposed scheme converges earlier than bitnterleaved cpm, with similar performance in the floor, and it is a valid alternative to ehamming codes for narrowband transmission.

the research was carried out in the framework of esa project. the sccpm the scheme proposed in this paper has been adopted for the implementation of a satellite broadband system for triple play services (high speed internet, television and telephony).

the authors would like to thank d. delaruelle from newtec for suggesting the code rate adaptability described in the appendix.

appendix method for code rate and block length adaptation for block codes define the block code (n, k, dmin) and denote k the inormation block length. to achieve code rate flexibility and make the block code compatible with k, several approaches can be adopted. for instance, if k is not a multiple of k some few dummy bits may be added to the data sequence to adjust its length to the block code. alternatively, the block code encoding the last subblock of information bits may be properly shortened to adapt to the information block size k. the two solutions entail some rate loss, which may be significant depending on the code rate and the information block size. here, a slightly different approach is proposed. the information block u is segmented into j subblocks. the first j1 subblocks are encoded by a (n − (m − 1), k − (m −