shared access satellite terrestrial reconfigurable backhaul network enabled by smart antennas at mmwave band

xavier artiga, ana pérez neira, jorge baranda, eva lagunas, symeon chatzinotas, rudolf zetik, przemyslaw gorski, konstantinos ntougias, david pérez, and georgios ziaragkas

xavier artiga, jorge baranda, and ana i. pérez neira are with centre tecnològic de telecomunicacions de catalunya (cttc/cerca); ana i. pérez neira is also with universitat politècnica de catalunya; eva lagunas and symeon chatzinotas are with the university of luxembourg; rudolf zetik is with fraunhofer institute for integrated circuits; przemyslaw gorski is with viasat antenna systems; konstantinos ntougias is with athens information technology; david pérez is with thales alenia space spain; georgios ziaragkas is with avanti communications integration of satellite and 5g networks

to meet the 5g coverage requirements .

for the sake of efficiency, 5g also represents a shift of paradigm in the design and management of telecommunication networks, from fixed to flexible solutions capable of adapting to different service needs. however, current wireless backhaul networks above 6 ghz consist of high directional links forming fixed topologies, which are designed through extensive radio planning campaigns. their capabilities to deal with failure or congestion events are very limited and constrained to the actiation of redundant equipment or to the change of the flow direction in the case of ring topologies. therefore, they cannot fully adapt the network topology to changes in traffic profiles, automatcally react to link failures, or easily include new nodes in the network, which are essential features in future 5g dense deployments.

current wireless backhaul solutions are also affected by inflexible and too conservative specrum management policies, which result in ineffiient spectrum utilization, especially considering the identified spectrum scarcity for meeting 5g demands. besides, current policies also prevent in general the spectrum coexistence between different services such as fixed satellite service (fss) and microwave backhaul links, although some exceptions are found such as the extended ka band (17.7 19.7 ghz) . however, even in this case, interference mitigation techniques are needed to protect satellite receivers from powerul terrestrial transmitters.

in order to overcome the aforementioned limitations of traditional backhaul solutions, the h2020 sansa project proposes a specrum efficient self organizing integrated terresrial satellite backhaul network operating at the extended ka band. the key enablers of the sansa solution are a novel hybrid network mangement scheme that makes the most efficient use of all network resources coming from the terestrial and satellite segments, and smart antenas providing network topology reconfiguration and spatial interference mitigation. satellite backaul of isolated cells is already a reality, but the seamless integration of the satellite in terrestrial backhaul networks has received very limited and recent attention . similarly, the consideration of topology reconfiguration in wireless backhaul satellite hub

hnm epc node internet

figure 2. aggregated network throughput and delay over time when evaluating the reference scenario using the sansa network with 4

time evolution (time slot)

sansa network no sansa network 35 6 4

avoidance and path length. essentially, bp mr performs routing decisions following a twotage process. first, it classifies data packets in a per interface queue system according to their final destination. second, it employs geographic and congestion information to compute the best possible next hop from all possible forwarding options. this decision is made for each multi raio backhaul node at each transmission instant. congestion information is obtained through the periodical exchange of control packets, called hello packets, between neighboring ibns. the granularity of the routing decision is also configurable, and it can be done on a per packt or per flow basis. the per packet approach provides better usage of the network resources; however, it may spread packets belonging to the same flow over different paths so that they are received out of order at the destination, creatng problems for a tcp receiver. in such cases, the per flow basis decision can overcome the packet reordering problem. identifying a flow as an origin to destination stream of a transport layer connection between two end hosts, each node maintains active per flow state information, mapping the packets of a flow to its determined path, calculated the first time the node sees the flow. hence, the ibn has the flexibility to route dynamically a new flow while still circumventing congested routes. this state information is elimnated at each ibn after the flow is not present in the network for a configurable period of time. next, we present the joint operation of the topology manager of the hnm and the bp mr routing protocol running at the ibns in a refernce scenario based on a real network deployent close to helsinki, as depicted in fig. 2. this scenario counts 15 backhaul nodes, 2 of them having terrestrial and satellite connection capabilties. the link rate of such links has been derived from an interference analysis and the characterstics of commercial equipment used in terresrial backhaul deployments. simulation results in table 1. simulated network spectral efficiency in b/s/hz. aggressive frequency reuse with interference mitigation

gain w.r.t. benchmark network se

larger shared bandwidth, the nse increases by a factor of 2, even without using had beamformng, whereas it goes up to a factor of 2.8 and 3.3 when applying it in the rural and urban scearios, respectively. in conclusion, had permits approaching the theoretical 4 gain improvement that comes from using a shared bandwidth 4 larger.

the second scenario addresses the nse achieved by the reference helsinki network assuming a frequency reuse scheme of 2 (to avoid full duplex communication) and nodes equipped with a 64 antenna array. as a benchark, we consider the nodes equipped with a conventional directive dish antenna and the benchmark carrier allocation introduced before (i.e., 8 carriers of 56 mhz bandwidth). as shown in table 1, the aggressive frequency reuse (from 8 carriers to 2) has a strong impact on the nse going from 330 b/s/hz to 2.9 b/s/hz when conidering the conventional dish antenna. on the other hand, the proposed had solution is able to provide nse gains up to 3.5 with respect to the benchmark, thus close to the theoretical 4 gains that would come from using 2 carriers instead of 8. we note that nse gains up to 9 have also been demonstrated by combining spaial multiplexing with beam and null steering in the same scenario .

sansa experimental platform technical research activities carried out in the sansa project achieved the targeted technoloy readiness level (trl) 4; thus, a technological validation was performed in a virtual electroagnetic environment at the facility for over their research and testing (forte) at fraunhofer institute for integrated circuits iis. this allowed us to test the basic functionalities of the proof of concept (poc) of the two sansa enablers, namely a had antenna array and the hnm/ibn pair. therefore, two small scale demonstrations in realistic but well controlled scenarios were perormed, as detailed next.

demonstration of multi antenna array at ka band and interference mitigation techniques the first demonstration scenario focused on the interference mitigation using a hybrid (analog digial) beamforming antenna array poc . it opertes at the extended ka band and consists of 64 transmitting antenna elements that are arranged in two side by side linear subarrays. each sinle antenna element is connected to a phase shiftr and an attenuator that are controlled by 8 bits for analog beamforming. two rf chains that drive the two subarrays were connected to a channel improve the backhaul network capacity and resilience.

this article presents and validates a novel hybrid management scheme for backhaul networks, which enables the integration of the satellite segment in a topology reconfigurable terrestrial wireless network, resulting in a flexible solution capable of addressing 5g challenges in both sparse and dense network deployments. bs1(2)

network layer emulation of terrestrial backhual links ibn2

physical layer emulation of satellite backhaul link bs3(1)

ota access link

emulated satellite link

well as aggressive frequency reuse between terrestrial wireless links. both are enabled by dynamic rrm and had beamforming techiques.

there are still some open research challengs to be solved for bringing such a solution to reality. first, despite the proposed management scheme being based on pure software functions that could easily be aligned with the software defined networking and network functions virtulization 5g concepts, it is important to deal with the specific integration of those functions in the 5g network management framework. second, deep integration of the topology manager and the radio resource manager functions is required for implementing an adaptive spectrum efficient solution. finally, although not addressed in the article due to space constraints, the experimental tests showed that the calibration of large hybrid analog digital arrays is still complex and of vital importance in order to efficiently mitigate intererence.

acknowledgment this work has received funding from the europen union's horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement no. 645047 (sansa).

white paper, july 2014.

s. maleki et al., "cognitive spectrum utilization in ka band multibeam satellite communications," ieee wireless comun., vol. 53, no. 3, june 2015, pp. 24 29.