spectrum sharing backhaul satellite terrestrial systems via analog beamforming

miguel ´angel v´azquez, luis blanco and ana i. p´erez neira, senior member, ieee

abstract—current satellite and terrestrial backhaul systems are deployed in disjoint frequency bands. this fact precludes an efficient use of the spectrum and limits the evolution of wireless backhauling networks. in this paper, we propose an interference mitigation technique in order to allow the spectrum coexistence between satellite and terrestrial backhaul links. this interference reliever is implemented at the terrestrial backhaul nodes which are assumed to be equipped with multiple antennas. due to the large bandwidth and huge number of antennas required in these systems, we consider pure analog beamforming. precisely, we assume a phased array beamforming configuration so that the terrestrial backhaul node can only reduce the interference by changing the phases of each beamforming weight. two cases are considered: the 18 and 28 ghz band where transmit and receive beamforming optimization problems shall be tackled respectively. in both cases, the optimization problem results in a non convex problem which we propose to solve via two alternative convex approximation methods. these two approaches are evaluated and they present less than 1 db array gain loss with respect to the upper bound solution. finally, the spectral efficiency gains of the proposed spectrum sharing scenarios are validated in numerical simulations.

keywords—beamforming, satellite communications, backhaul

systems, non convex qcqp, phase only beamforming.

future exponential user data rate demands will not only impact the radio access technology but also the backhauling mechanisms. indeed, these backhaul services are meant to be ubiquitous, offering extremely high rate wireless connectivity in order to reduce the capital expenditures. with the aim of attending to these demands, the spectral efficiency of the frequency bands where these services are currently deployed shall be increased.

in here, we consider the millimeter wave (mmwave) bands of 17.3 − 20.2 ghz and 27.5 − 30 ghz currently utilized by fixed satellite services (fss) and backhaul fixed services (fs). these two portions of the spectrum are currently fragmented by fss exclusive use, fs exclusive use and shared for both services . despite the spectrum regulation permits spectrum

this work has received funding from the european union's horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement no 645047 (sansa); the spanish ministry of economy and competitiveness (miniserio de economia y competitividad) under project tec2017 90093 c3 1 r (teresa); and from the catalan government (2017 sgr 1479).

´a. v´azquez and luis blanco are with centre tecnol`ogic de les telecomunicacions de catalunya (cttc), barcelona, spain. ana i. p´erezeira is with universitat politecnica de catalunya (upc) and cttc. emails: mavazquez@cttc.es, lblanco@cttc.es, ana.perez@cttc.es sharing, neither fs nor fss deploy their services in shared bands as no interference protection can be claimed.

according to the recent results in cellular mmwave specrum sharing techniques, due to the high directional antenas used, very large spectral efficiencies can be obtained if multiple transmitters share the spectrum . in addition, the authors in , consider the spectrum sharing between fss and mmwave cellular systems and they propose different configurations for keeping the interference towards the fss terminals low.

the shared use of the spectrum between fs and fss is also studied in , . the authors in propose the use of databases jointly with spectrum sensing for dynamically allocate the spectrum for fs and fss. in addition, the use multiple low noise blocks (lnb) at the fss is analyzed in both and for mitigating the interference with the aim of using a more aggressive frequency reuse among fs and fss.

interference between fs and fss has been identified in , precluding an efficient use of the spectrum in certain cases. this paper focuses on interference mitigation techniques for supporting the spectrum sharing between fs and fss. in particular, we consider that the fs terminals are equipped with multiple antennas with the objective of not only obtaining a high gain towards the intended link, but also to reduce the interference towards the non intended receivers. alternatively, we consider that the fss terminals are only equipped with a single antenna.

our approach differs to the previous commented works: the use of multiple antennas in the fs links has not been addressed before for interference mitigation. two main cases are considered. in the 17.3 − 20.2 ghz band devoted to the satellite forward link (space to earth communication), we design the fs transmit beamforming that shall keep the intererence towards the fss terminals under a certain threshold. in addition, we consider the 27.5 − 30 ghz band dedicated to the satellite return link (earth to space transmission) where the fs terminals shall design their receive beamforming in order to mitigate the received fss interference.

since fully digital transceivers cannot be used due to its tremendous cost and complexity , we resort to analog beamforming schemes. in particular, we focus on phased array architectures where the transceiver is only equipped with a single radio frequency chain and the spatial processing is done through phase shifters. note that in backhauling mmwave transmissions, the scattering is expected to be limited and; thus, the resulting channel matrix generally only admits a singletream transmission (i.e. beamforming) . 1

phased arrays present less flexibility than digital beamformng solutions. while fully digital schemes can vary not only the phase and amplitude of the beamforming weights, phased arrays can only change their phase, keeping its magnitude fixed. in this context, the traditional beamforming designs for spectrum sharing systems , must be revisited to become phase only designs.

despite the recent works on phase only beamforming , little is known about interference mitigation techniques using this multiantenna configuration. to the best of authors knowledge, the work in is the first one considering interference mitigation via phase only beamforming.

we first introduce the fully digital optimization problems and; posteriorly, we describe and remark the differences with the phased array (phase only) problems. both transmit and receive phase only beamforming designs lead to non convex quadratically constraint quadratic programs (qcqp) due to the equality quadratic constraints imposed by the phase only restrictions. these problems are difficult to solve and convex relaxation techniques are required. we resort to two different alternatives based on the concave convex procedure (ccp) . first, we consider the equivalent semidefinite program (sdp) reformulation and we apply the ccp method on the rank one constraint. alternatively, we consider the penalized ccp (pccp) presented in of the original qcqp scheme. both approaches behave better than the sdp relaxation (sdr) and gaussian randomization method which is known to be inefficient when there are dual side constraints , . to sum up, the contributions of the paper are the following: 1) we propose two optimization frameworks for dealing phase only beamforming optimization, namely sdpcp and qcqp pccp. while the transmit case sdpcp is preliminary studied in , qcqp pccp is a new scheme specially adapted for this problem. in addition, the design of phase only receive beamforming is novel.

2) the proposed optimization frameworks are compared in terms of performance and computational complexity. the most adequate optimization framenterestingly, work varies whether we consider the receive or transmit beamforming problem.

3) the achievable rates of the shared use of the spectrum between fs and fss are evaluated in the 17.3 − 20.2 ghz and 27.5−30 ghz bands. we observe a significant spectral efficiency gain by using the proposed interfernce mitigation techniques.

the paper is organized as follows. section ii describes the system and channel model. section iii presents the receive and transmit analog beamforming optimization problems. section iv proposes two optimization frameworks for optimizing the described problems. section v depicts the numerical simulaion results and section vi concludes.

notation: throughout this paper, the following notations are adopted. boldface upper case letters denote matrices and boldface lower case letters refer to column vectors. (.)h , (.)t , (.)∗ denote a hermitian transpose, transpose, and conjugate matrix, respectively. ||.|| refer to the expected value operator and the frobenius norm, respectively. [x]i denotes the i th element of vector x. | · | denotes the absolute value operator. ◦ denotes the hadamard matrix product. tr (·) denotes the trace operator. a ≻ 0 describes the set of semidefinite positive matrices a.

ii. system model and channel model let us consider a fs link (i.e. a fixed wireless link between terrestrial entities) where the transmitter is equipped with nt antennas and the receiver with nr antennas in the shared 18 ghz band. in this portion of the spectrum, satellite receivers can be deployed but they cannot claim protection from the fs links. the received signal at the fs receiver can be modelled by

yf s = hvs + n, (1) where h ∈ cnr×nt is the channel matrix, v ∈ cnt ×1 is the transmit beamforming, s is the transmitted symbol with zero mean and unit energy and n is the additive white gaussian noise term with zero mean and covariance matrix σ2 f s nr i.

in the 18 ghz band, the fs transmission takes place in presence of k very small aperture terminal (vsat) satellite receivers. these vsats are terminals that enable the fss. that is, vsats receive data from the satellite forward link (from space to earth). the received signal of the k th vsat can be modelled by

(2) where gk ∈ cnt ×1 is the channel vector between the fs transmitter and the k th vsat receiver and wk is the noise term of the k th vsat receiver assumed to be gaussian zero mean with variance σ2 k vs + wk,

the considered backhauling systems could be deployed in the 28 ghz band which is used by vsats for the return link transmission (from earth to space). these transmission would interfere the fs links deployed at the 28 ghz. mathematically, the received signal of a fs link in presence of m interfering vsats is

pvsat,mpmsv sat,m + n

where u ∈ cnr×1 is the receive beamforming, t ∈ cnt ×1 is the transmit beamforming, pm ∈ cnr×1 is the channel vector between the m th vsat transmitter and the fs receiver, svsat,m is the zero mean unit energy symbol transmitted by the m th vsat, pv sat,m its transmit power and n the noise term assumed to be gaussian with zero mean and variance equal to σ2 vsat. figure 1 describes both system models. as a matter of fact, the mmwave backhaul channel modelling has not been deeply addressed. indeed, the literature has been focused on mmwave urban and cellular systems . to the best of author's knowledge, the work in [25, section 5.7] is the only one reporting the channel modelling parameters for backhauling scenarios. in this context, the channel modelling can be described as follows

(4) fig. 1. schematic of the considered scenarios where the red lines represent the interference signals and the green ones the legitimate transmissions. on the left it is depicted the 18 ghz band case where the fs interfere with the vsats. figure on the right describes the 28 ghz shared band case where the vsats interfere the fs links.

where l denote the number of sub paths and c the number of clusters. the value αcl is a small scale fading term of the l th sub path at the c th cluster for c > 1 and l > 1 otherwise, for the value α11 is assumed to be equal to one. vectors atx(·, ·) ∈ cnt ×1 and arx(·, ·) ∈ cnr×1 are the antenna responses of both the transmitter and the receiver respectively. the transmit and receive antenna responses depend on both the angles of departure (aod), θtx cl , and angles of arrival (aoa), θrx

where acl is rayleigh distributed with mean 0.1 and ψcl is uniformly distributed from 0 to 2π. we assume that 11, θrx θtx 11 are deterministic and it can be computed by known the relative positions between the transmitter and the receiver. in addition, for c > 1 and l > 1, we assume that 11 + χtx, ϕtx 11 + χrx, ϕrx

where χtx, ψtx, ψrx and χrx are zero mean gaussian disributed random variables with standard deviation equal to 5. the steering vectors atx(·, ·) and arx(·, ·) depend on the antenna array structure and the element spacing. for the fs terminals, we consider the uniform rectangular array (ura) whose steering vector can be written as

where ax and ay are (9) and (10) respectively. nx, ny are the number of elements in the horizontal and vertical dimension, dx, dy the element spacing in the horizontal and vertical dimension and λ the wavelength. for the sake of simplicity and without loss of generality we assume nxny = nt = nr. note that we have not considered the non line of sight (nlos) component of channel modelling which have been described in several works . this is because we focus on backhaul cellular networks which are generally deployed in isolated towers at rural areas or above the rooftop at urban scenarios . for radio access architectures, nlos channel impact is of key importance and it must be considered. the antenna response of the vsats can be written as

where gmax is the maximum antenna gain and g(θ, ϕ) decribes the antenna radiation pattern of the vsat and it can be obtained from itu r s.465 6 . finally, γ for denotes the path loss which can be written as ) (

where d is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver.

to sum up, this paper considers two spectrum sharing

1) scenario a: at 17.3 20.2 ghz where a satellite forward link transmission (i.e. space to earth link) and fs links could coexist.

2) scenario b: at 27.5 30.0 ghz where a satellite return link transmission (i.e. earth to space link) and fs links could coexist.

in both cases, we consider that the fs terminals (transmit and receive) have multiple antennas and the fss links have a single antenna. in this context, the role of the fs terminals is different at each scenario: while in scenario a, they have to restrict the created interference to the fss; in scenario b they have to mitigate the interference that they receive from the fss. this is, we do not consider that the fss terminals perform interference mitigation. this approach will support the deployments in the mentioned spectrum sharing scenarios without updating the fss terminals equipment.

it is important to remark that despite we consider transmit and receive beamforming for the fs links, this paper does not tackle the transmit and receive joint optimization probem. instead, we consider transmit and receive beamforming optimization separately, addressing the 18 and 28 ghz bands sub problems respectively.

iii. beamforming optimization problem statements

this section presents the optimization problems to be tackled in order to allow the spectrum sharing coexistence of fss and fs links. precisely, the beamforming optimization is presented both at the transmit and receive side of the fs links. we present both the fully digital and fully analog beamforming solutions, which offer a substantial different cost. indeed, while the fully digital solution requires either nt or nr rf chains at both the receiver and the transmit side, the fully analog scheme only requires a single rf chain. figures 2 and 3 depict the fully digital and fully analog beamforming solutions. 3

rf chain··· hpa hpa hpa rf chain rf chain rf chain rf chain baseband processor lna lna lna

hpa hpa hpa rf chain lna lna lna ···phase shifterphase shifterphase shifter phase shifter rf chain···phase shifterphase shifter fig. 2. fully digital fs beamforming. in contrast to an all analog scheme, this architecture spatially processes the data in a baseband processor which offers a large flexibility in terms of operations.

fig. 3. fully analog fs beamforming. in contrast to an all digital scheme, the spatial processing can only be done in analog domain through phase shifters. note that the power amplifiers are fixed to a transmit power that cannot be modified.

a. transmit beamforming optimization problem (scenario a) the transmit beamforming optimization with an all digital

architecture can be mathematically described as follows

where p is the maximum available power and ϵk the maximum allowed array gain value towards the k th vsat. the optimizaion problem in (13) aims to maximize the data rate of the fs link while keeping an interference constraint towards the fss receivers. by modifying ϵk we can control the interference power signal received by the fss receiver. 4

the optimization problem (13) is a non convex qcqp since it is the maximization of a convex function. the optimization problem in (13) can be relaxed to a convex problem with the sdr method. this technique relaxes the original problem into ( )

the optimization problem in (14) is the sdr of the optimizaion problem in (13). that is, if we include in (14) an additional constraint

where rank (·) denotes the rank operator; problems in (14) and (13) are equivalent. the optimization

the optimization problem (14) is a semidefinite program which is convex and; it can be solved via interior point methods. indeed, whenever the optimal solution of (14) denoted by v⋆ is rank one, the sdr is tight and the optimal solution of the original problem (13) can be obtained by comuting the eigenvector associated to the maximum eigenvalue of v⋆. nevertheless, the optimal solution v⋆ is generally high rank so that gaussian randomization methods are required. these methods are based on the creation of a large number of gaussian randomization instances with zero mean and covariance matrix equal to v⋆. among all realizations, it is selected the one with the best performance (the best array gain for our case) that does not violate the constraints. the reader can refer to for further details. thus,

whenever the transmitter can only modify the phases of the beamforming weights, the optimization problem in (13) becomes

where the main difference compared to (13) is (17d), which are the phase only beamforming constraints. even though a impact on the priori optimization problem, it entails a major difficulty for the sdr and; specifically, for the gaussian randomization. this is described in the following. these new set of constraints do not

considering the sdr relaxation in (14) with the correspondng phase only set of constraints (17d) and v⋆ not being rank one, the gaussian randomization technique computes a vector gaussian random variable with zero mean and covariance matrix v⋆. with this variable, vrand, the system designer has to obtain a feasible solution of (17). this feasible solution is imposed by the phase only restrictions which require that the randomization is transformed into

in other words, the scaling factor is not unique. this fact differs from other optimizations that have used sdr. this is the case of the multigroup multicast optimization , where after the gaussian randomization the sdr requires a scaling factor optimization bearing in mind the constraints. this technique cannot be applied here as there is no flexibility in the scaling factor. as a result, the sdr leading to a high rank solution has an enormous difficulty of delivering a feasible rank one solution due to the equality constraints. numerically, we oberved the performance of sdr and gaussian randomization for solving (14). we validate that for 100 realizations and 1 interference 107 gaussian randomizations are unable to yield to a feasible solution of (14). this motivates the techniques presented in section iv.

b. receive beamforming optimization problem (scenario b) let us consider the receive beamforming focuses on maxmizing the received desired signal sinr . for our case, the sinr can be written as

m=1 pv sat,m|uh pm|2 + σ2 bearing in mind that the sinr in (20) does not depend on the norm of the receive beamforming (∥u∥2), the receive beamforming that maximizes the sinr can be written as

in case we restrict the receive beamformer, v to be phase only, we shall consider the following optimization problem the optimization problem in (23) is a difficult fractional quadratic optimization problem that does not admit a closedorm solution like for the digital case. in order to solve this problem, we consider the next change of variable u√

with this, the optimization problem in (23), can be rewritten as wh bhw

note that once the optimization problem in (27) is solved, the optimal solution of the original problem is obtained such as u⋆ = w⋆/ϑ⋆.

in any case, this last optimization problem presents the same difficulties as the transmit beamforming optimization due to phase only constraints and the additional equality constraint wh rw = 1. bearing this in mind, the next section proposes to solve the problem of phase only beamforming under specrum sharing restrictions.

iv. convex relaxation phase only beamforming techniques

this section proposes two alternatives for efficiently phasenly beamforming optimization problems. both approaches are novel solutions for the aforementioned problems and, as it is shown, they can provide approximate efficient solutions with a relatively low computational complexity.

a. sdp concave convex procedure

the optimization problem (17) can be written as ( hv )

where en is a matrix with zero entries instead the n th diagonal element which is equal to one.

as discussed in , the constraint (29e) is equivalent to

for any arbitrary semidefinite positive matrix v. the optimizaion problem in (29) is non convex due to the inequality in (29e) (i.e. λmax (x) is a convex function for x semidefinite positive). these type of non convex problems can be solved via the concave convex procedure, also known as sequential convex programming . this method substitutes the nononvex (concave) parts of the problem by an affine approxmation around an arbitrary point z(k). given a feasible 5

(30) initial point z(0), the method consists of sequentially solving the approximated optimization problem considering z(k) the previous optimal solution.

for our case, the affine approximation of λmax (v) around

, (31) where z(k) max is the eigenvector associated to the maximum eigenvalue of z(k). this approximation has considered that ( maxz(k),h z(k) z(k) as reported in . max since obtaining an initial feasible point z(0) is as chalenging as obtaining a solution of (29), we resort to the penalty method. this mechanism replaces a set of constraints by adding a penalty function in the objective function. this penalty function shall be a measure of the replaced constraints violation. for our case, we elect and reformulate the approxmate rank one constraint to act as a penalty function. with this, the optimization problem in (29) becomes

where µ(k) is a parameter that balances the penalty function importance over the whole objective function. for high values of µ(k), the optimization focuses on obtaining a rank one solution whereas for low values of µ(k), the optimization targets the maximization of the array gain towards the intended user.

max with the eigenector associated with the largest eigenvalue of the previous optimization solution, we can obtain an objective value soluion of the optimization problem (17). as for general methods dealing with non convex problems, the performance of the obtained solution depends on the proper election of z(0) and the value of µ(k). in here, we consider an initial z(0) equal to the optimal problem of (29) without (29e). this initial point follows the heuristics that the optimal rank one solution shall be close to its high rank optimal design.

furthermore, the parameter µ(k) is initialized with a low value and increased at each iteration. with this, we ensure that at the first steps of the iteration, the algorithm is focused on the objective function optimization while for the latter steps, a rank one solution is obtained. the mechanism is depicted in algorithm 1 where { controls the convergence of the algorithm and κ guarantees the rank one of the final solution. precisely, the value of κ shall be very low (10−3 at least) in order to obtain a rank one solution. we coin this scheme as sdp ccp.

the algorithm presented in this section suffers from certain drawbacks. first, the number of iterations can be high, leading to a very large computational complexity. in addition, at each iteration a sdp shall be solved whose worst case asymptotic computational complexity is high. the next section provides 6

compute v(k) according to (32).; if

end output the final solution; algorithm 1: sdp ccp procedure for phase only spectrum sharing transmit beamforming techniques

an alternative convex relaxation that yields to an efficient solution with a lower computational complexity scheme per iteration.

prior to presenting this alternative method, we describe the receive beamforming optimization. given the optimization problem in (27), the sdp ccp approach to this optimization problem can be written as ) ( (( )

(33) for this case, we shall update at each iteration z(k+1) ← w(k) where w(k) is the optimal solution in the k th iteration. in this context, algorithm 1 leads to an objective value solution of the problem in (27). note that sdp ccp always converge to a feasible solution as for high values of µ, the optimization problem yields to a rank one solution.

b. qcqp penalty convex concave procedure

an alternative to the previous method is to consider the concave convex procedure of the original optimization probem. by writing the optimization problem in (17) in standard form, we have

note that the set of equality constraints have been expanded in two sets of inequality constraints. by observing (34) it is indicated that the non convexity of the problem is due to the objective function and the constraints in (34e). now, in contrast to the previous case, we consider the penalized convex concave method directly to this optimization problem. this method approximates the concave parts of the problem by its first taylor approximation and iteratively solves the equivalent problem. we describe this approximation for our case in the following.

therefore, using the linear restriction around the point z, we might replace the non convex inequalities in (34) so that

the optimization problem (37) is a second order cone programing (socp) that can be efficiently solved via interior point methods. under this context, given an initial feasible value of z, z(0), iteratively solving (37) leads to a karush kuhn tucker (kkt) point of (34) .

however, obtaining an initial feasible point z(0) is as chalenging as optimizing (34). in order to solve this problem, the authors in impose the use of slack variables over all constraints and penalizing the objective function with its sum. following this approach, the optimization problem at the n th iteration can be described as }

(38) where β is a regularization factor that controls the feasibility of the constraints. this regularization factor can be updated over the iterations. for our case, we consider a multiplicative update by a factor ρ. for high values of β, the optimization focuses on yielding to a feasible point of (29). for low values of β, the optimization problem targets to maximize the array gain towards the secondary user. the algorithm is summarized in algorithm 2 and coined qcqp pccp.

(cid:12) as it can be observed, the proposed algorithm includes the (cid:12) (cid:12) ≤ ψ. this condition guarantees stopping criteria that all the constraints of the original problem (34) are fulfilled for a sufficiently low ψ. note that, it is possible to allow diferent maximum violations of each constraint by weighting the m sm. different components of the penalty function data: z(0) and µ(0) result: p⋆ (cid:12) (cid:12) ∑ (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) ≤ ψ and ∥p(n) − p(n−1)∥ ≤ ω do (cid:12) while

if t < tmax then

t ← 0; initialize with a new random value z(0); set up β(0) again;

end output the final solution; algorithm 2: qcqp pccp optimization for phase only beamforming optimization.

the role of β is to balance the optimization of the array gain to the intended users and the minimization of the constraint violation (i.e. for very high β the optimization problem seeks a feasible point rather than optimizing the array gain). we vary the value of β over the different iterations. first, we set a relatively low value of β(0) and; posteriorly, we sequentially increase this value. in other words, the proposed scheme first focuses on maximizing the array gain to the secondary user and, later, it seeks for a feasible solution. to avoid β taking a very large value when the number of iterations becomes large, leading to numerical difficulties, we consider a maximum β value βmax.

algorithm 2 is not a descent algorithm as mentions. with the aim of fostering the convergence, a maximum number of iterations tmax is imposed and, in case it is reached, we start with a new random initial point.

for the sake of completeness, let us formulate the qcqphe receive beamforming optimization

pccp scheme of method ,

(39) with this and algorithm 2, we can achieve an objective value solution of the original phase only receive optimization problem. 7

, this section aims at studying the computational complexties of the presented algorithms. note that both schemes depend on the average number iterations which is a problemependent parameter that cannot be analytically obtained. uner this context, we assume that a total number of qsdp ccp and qqcqp pccp iterations are required for the sdp convex concave procedure and the qcqp penalized convex concave procedure. we first consider the computational complexity of the transmit beamforming case and, later, we identify the computational complexity for the receive beamforming optimization case.

the sdp convex concave procedure solves a sdp at each iteration. this sdp finds an efficient matrix of nt × nt dimensions with 2nt + k constraints. on the contrary, the qcqp penalized convex concave procedure approach requires to find a vector of 2nt dimensions with a total number of constraints of k + 3nt .

as discussed in , it is generally more convenient to solve a socp rather than a sdp via interior point methods. indeed, it is known that the upper bound of number of iterations ) a needed to find an efficient solution of socp is o where a is the number of constraints of the socp. on the contrary, the worst case number of iterations in a sdp is , where b is the total number of constraints o and uw the dimensions of the w th constraint of the sdp.

in addition, at each iteration an interior point method requires a worst case number of operations for the sdp of ( , where c are the dimensions of the sdp o variable. for socp, the computational complexity per iteration ) ( , where d are the dimensions is reduced to o of the socp variable and vw the dimensions of the w th constraint. considering the above results, the computational complexity for the sdp convex concave procedure becomes

by the asymptotic composition rule of computational complexty, the resulting computational complexity becomes

(41) where it has been assumed that nt ≫ k. this is the number of antennas is much higher than the number of fss which is consistent with the system we are considering.

bearing in mind the results for the socp, the computational complexity for the qcqp penalized convex concave procedure is mqcqp pccp = o

where it is evident the substantial computational complexity reduction with respect to sdp ccp method in terms of the nt exponential factor. from the analytical perspective it is difficult to derive an upper bound of the number of iterations of both methods. this is completed in the following section. it is important to remark that for the receive beamforming optimization, the same asymptotic computational complexity results are obtained in both cases. this is due the fact that the same order of magnitude of constraints and number of variables are employed for both the receive and transmit beamforming optimization cases.

this section presents the numerical evaluation of the proosed methods. to solve the described optimization problems we used cvx, a package for specifying and solving convex programs , . this solver runs in a windows desktop with 4 intel i5 cores and 4gb of ram. we consider 1000 montecarlo runs for every numerical result.

as described in the previous sections, we consider the presence of fs and fss in the same spectrum. we first describe the communication parameters of the fss transmission in table i. the distance between two fs and other fss is assumed to be uniform random distributed between 1 and 20 kms. considering this distance, the elevation angle variation is low and assumed to be uniformly distributed between 10 and 10 degrees. in addition, ϕ is considered to be uniformly distributed between 60 and 60 degrees. as a backhaul scenario with long distances is assumed, we consider the channel model parameters of one cluster (c = 1) and l = 3 sub rays.

the fss communication link parameters are described in table ii. we consider a geostationary orbit (i.e. the satellite user terminal points to a fixed satellite) with an standard carrier over noise (c/n0) value of 10.5 db. in addition, it is assumed that the satellite user terminal has an elevation angle of 40 degrees, a common value for western countries. in all simulations we utilize the channel model described in section ii with the aod, aoa, c and l described in table i. we first evaluate the transmit beamforming method and then we describe the results for the receive beamforming case.

for both optimization frameworks, we assume

(44) 50 qcqp pccpwithsdrinitialization 120 60 60 80 80 0 sdp ccp 90 qcqp pccpwithrandominitilization 100 100 numberofantennaelementscputime[s] 40 40 140 20 70

let us first consider the transmit beamforming case. both proposed techniques are first compared in figures 4 and 5. for obtaining these results we considered the case of k = 1 and nt = 36, 49, 64, 81 and 100 transmit antenna elements. in addition, ϵ = −40 db. in figure 4 we plot the performance loss defined as

where v∗ is the sdr solution of (17). the figure of merit of losstx describes how close the relaxation technique approxiates to the upper bound solution of v∗. for the qcqp pccp method we consider two initialization methods: a gaussian randomization considering the covariance matrix of v∗ and i. the idea of using an initial random point considering v∗ relays on the heuristic that the rank one solution should be close to its high rank solution.

fig. 4. performance loss for phase only transmit beamforming optimization problem.

considering the results in figure 4, the method that behaves most closely to the upper bound is sdp ccp. we observe a substantial difference between the two initialization alternaives: the qcqp pccp method using the sdr initialization shows a better performance compared to the case where the initial point is obtained pure randomly. in other words, the use of the sdr initialization is essential for obtaining an efficient solution with the qcqp pccp method.

the central processing unit time to compute a solution is described in figure 5. it can be observed a large difference between sdp ccp and qcqp pccp with both initializations. the performance gain of qcqp pccp is especially large when nt increases. it is important to remark that the qcqp pccp presents a slightly better performance in cpu time when the sdr initialization is used. 9

fig. 5. average cpu time versus number of antennas for phase only transmit optimization problem.

under this context, we can establish that qcqp pccp with sdr initialization is the method that presents the best cpu time and performance trade off: its computational efficiency makes it appropriate to next generation multiantenna backhaul systems. due to that, we use it for computing the achievable data rates in an scenario described by table i. the results are depicted in figure 6 where we plot the empirical cumulative distribution function of the average vsat achievable rate defined as

psatelliteg vsat + |gh σ2 rvsat = .

we consider the case where k takes with equal probability the values of 1, 2 and 3 and nt = 49. furthermore, we include two cases ϵ = −30 and ϵ = −50 dbw.

fig. 6. empirical cumulative distribution of the fss achievable rates, rvsat, when optimizing the transmit beamforming with qcqp pccp with sdr initialization considering nt = 49 and different ϵ values.

as it can be observed in figure 6, the use of interference mitigation techniques is essential for providing a sufficiently large data rate for the satellite user terminals. indeed, whenever 50 60 80 10 0 sdp ccp 90 100 25 40 15 5 20 70

nointerference withinterferencemitigation 0.1 0.8 0.3 0.2 10 0 0 30 1 45 0.9 0.7 35 0.6 25 0.5 40 15 5 0.4 20 no interference mitigation techniques are used, it is observed that the data rates yield to very low values. as a matter of fact, the lower ϵ the larger the satellite achievable rates are obtained.

we now focus on the receive beamforming case. the losses

where u∗ is the solution of the semidefinite relaxation of (23) and u is the obtained solution with the proposed optimization frameworks. as it can be observed in figure 7, we observe a similar behaviour as in the transmit beamforming case: sdp ccp is the one offering the lowest performance loss. in addition, the use of an sdr randomization as an initial point results in a better performance compared to the pure random initialization for the qcqp pccp as it happens with the transmit beamforming optimization.

on the other hand, the cpu time conducts differently to the transmit beamforming case. considering the results in figure 8, sdp ccp is the solution offering the lowest average cpu time. indeed, despite sdp ccp obtains the highest worst case asymptotic computational complexity, the overall cpu time is lower compared to qcqp pccp with the two initialization alternatives. this is due to the average number of iterations required for each method. we observe that for the sdp ccp most of the cases it is only required 2 or 3 iterations while for the qcqp pccp a number higher of 10 iterations is required. in light of the above results, sdp ccp scheme is the most adequate alternative for optimizing the receive beamforming case. this alternative is employed for obtaining the results in figure 9 where we plot 10

where sinr is defined in (20). as a benchmark, we consider the case where there is no interference (i.e. pv sat = 0). as it can be observed in figure 9, despite the presence of interference, the receive beamforming design is able to offer an achievable rate similar to the case where no interference is present.

fig. 9. empirical cumulative distribution of the fs achievable rates, rfs, when the fs receiver is equipped with nr = 49 antennas and the optimization method used is sdp ccp.

this paper proposes the use of phased arrays in spectrum sharing satellite terrestrial backhaul systems. in the considered scenario, interference between fs and fss occurs and, in order to mitigate it, we propose two optimization frameworks for obtaining efficient transmit and receive beamforming designs. as discussed in the numerical evaluation, while for transit beamforming qcqp pccp presents the best performance cpu time trade off, for the receive beamforming case, sdpcp is the most convenient alternative as it shows a very low cpu time yet a very large performance gain. in both cases, the obtained array gain presents less than 1 db loss compared to the sdp upper bound. considering the resulting spectral efficiencies and the reduced hardware implementation cost, the conceived techniques are promising solutions for next generation wireless spectrum sharing deployments in mmwave bands.

the beamforming techniques presented in this paper are key enabling components for both allowing an extraordinary increase of the spectrum usage for satellite systems and a potential spectrum license reduction for cellular operators. in other words, while currently there is no satellite deployments in the ka shared band and no backhaul links in the exclusive satellite band, the use of the proposed multiantenna optimizaion techniques will enable those new spectrum applications.

j. p. trufero and et al, "d2.1 review of regulatory environment," sansa project (h2020 645047), public deliverable, jan. 2016. f. boccardi, h. shokri ghadikolaei, g. fodor, e. erkip, c. fischione, m. kountouris, p. popovski, and m. zorzi, "spectrum pooling in mmwave networks: opportunities, challenges, and enablers," ieee communications magazine, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 33 39, november 2016. h. shokri ghadikolaei, f. boccardi, c. fischione, g. fodor, and m. zorzi, "spectrum sharing in mmwave cellular networks via cell association, coordination, and beamforming," ieee journal on seected areas in communications, vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 2902 2917, nov 2016. m. a. vazquez, l. blanco, a. perez neira, and m. a. lagunas, "phase only transmit beamforming for spectrum sharing microwave systems," in wsa 2016; 20th international itg workshop on smart antennas, march 2016, pp. 1 7.

a. l. yuille and a. rangarajan, "the concave convex procedure,"

o. mehanna, k. huang, b. gopalakrishnan, a. konar,

and n. sidiropoulos, "feasible point pursuit and successive approximation of non convex qcqps," signal processing letters, ieee, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 804 808, july 2015.

a. maltsev and et al, "d5.1 channel modeling and characterization,"

h. d. tuan, p. apkarian, s. hosoe, and h. tuy, "d.c. optimization approach to robust control: feasibility problems," international journal 11