spectrum optimization for satellite communication systems with heterogeneous user preferences

, member, ieee, kwok yan lam , senior member, ieee, min jia

kanglian zhao , member, ieee, xiuhua li

abstract—owing to the proliferation of sophisticated satellite applications and rapid growth in data consuming satellite services, refining spectrum efficiency remains a critical issue for satellite sysems and has been promoted by the research community, mainly from the perspectives of spectrum reuse and dynamic spectrum access. in this paper, we propose a new approach to spectrum opimization for multibeam satellite systems—introducing a marketased pricing mechanism. in this paper, a key point to be highighted is the challenge of building a market inspired model that takes into consideration of satellite communication characteristics, and not only simply migrating spectrum pricing of terrestrial netorks into satellite systems. in this connection, we propose a differntial pricing scheme which formulates the optimization problem based on the hotelling model. the differential pricing scheme is capable of addressing the heterogeneous and tremendous effects of long and rigorous satellite links on its spectrum. numerical reults are given to show the effectiveness of the proposed method in enhancing spectrum efficiency.

index terms—hotelling model, multibeam satellite systems,

s atellite communication networks have successfully

served the traditional needs of the telecommunication maret, i.e., telephony and broadcasting. in recent years, owing to the rapid development of high throughput satellites systems, they are increasingly relied upon as a broadband access solution in geographic areas where terrestrial links are impractical to deploy .

manuscript received december 14, 2018; revised february 20, 2019; accepted april 5, 2019. this work was supported in part by the national research foundaion, prime ministers office, singapore, under its strategic capability research centres funding initiative, and in part by the national natural science founation of china under grant 61671183 and grant 61771163. (corresponding author: min jia.)

f. li is with the college of information engineering, zhejiang university of technology, hangzhou 310023, china, and also with the school of computer science and engineering, nanyang technological university, singapore 639798 (e mail: fengli2002@yeah.net).

k. y. lam is with the school of computer science and engineering, nanyang technological university, singapore 639798 (e mail: kwokyan. lam@ntu.edu.sg).

m. jia is with the school of electronics and information engineering, harbin

institute of technology, harbin 150080, china (e mail: jiamin@hit.edu.cn).

k. zhao is with the school of electronic science and engineering, nanjing

university, nanjing 210093, china (e mail: zhaokanglian@nju.edu.cn).

x. li is with the school of big data & software engineering, chongqing

l. wang is with the college of information engineering, zhejiang university

, member, ieee, and li wang

many techniques, including multiple spot beams, multiprotool label switching, stochastic networks, and dynamic spectrum access, have been developed to exploit satellite system's potenials in order to support broadband or data consuming satellite applications , . during the course of designing a proper reource optimization strategy in communication systems, a key point required to be fixed is how to balance the benefits of every part involved in the bargaining. especially in terrestrial communication networks, market inspired technique, including pricing based or auction based method is often under considration to search the optimal solution or attract potential paricipants. nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, related market oriented research work for satellite communication sysems is still few; only several pricing based resource optimizaion proposals have been devised , .

as satellite bands have extensive span ranging from several hundreds of mhz to dozens of ghz, and satellite links always suffer from long and unstable paths, different satellite applicaions could experience hugely different levels of channel fading. when satellite networks accumulate sufficient idle spectrum for uniform selling, it requires a sophisticated and well formulated mechanism to maximize the utilization of the heterogeneous and possibly unstable spectrum. to address this issue, we inroduce a differential pricing model, the hotelling model which is suitable for pricing scenarios with heterogeneous products. through this dynamic pricing method for satellite systems, the proposed market mechanism incentivize different users to participate and optimize utilization efficiency autonomously. this way, the main concerns of satellite users can be addressed, while their stochastic preferences on heterogeneous spectrum will be modeled on the basis of this spectrum pricing. an iterative pricing algorithm is achieved after establishing the nash equilibrium. the rest of this paper is organized as follows. in section ii, a system model with regard to multibeam satellite systems is given. then, the spectrum optimization algorithm applying hotelling game model is developed in section iii to maximize satellite systems' benefits. also, numerical results are provided to testify the proposal's performances in section iv. we conclude this paper in section v.

ii. system model

a multibeam satellite system which stays in geostationary track and adopts spectrum reuse technique to enhance specrum utilization is considered in this paper. to be specific, a 1

practical four color spectrum reuse pattern is applied in the scenario as shown in fig. 1. the satellite systems are supposed to utilize flexible resource optimization methods. and, only uplink transmission of satellite users is considered in this case. besides, oblique projection based multibeam system is taken into account to make the system model closer to the actual applications. as shown in fig. 1, the cells with same color share the same band wherein interference will occur.

in multibeam satellite systems, interbeam interference can have impacts on system performance. in the coverage area of multibeam satellite, oblique projection is mixed with ellipse proection, which leads to the difference between multibeam satelite systems and traditional cellular distribution. in this case, we take into account the effects of this mixed projection as shown in fig. 1. wherein, ϕ denotes the deviation angle between satellite terminal (β, 2) and the cell center. we have

where ds o is the distance between spatial satellite and the cell center. ds β2 and ds β2 are the distances from terrestrial user (β, 2) to satellite and subastral point, respectively. r denotes earth radius. in uplink transmission, the interbeam interference can be given as

where ρβ2 is the transmit power of satellite user (β, 2). gβ2(εβ2) denotes the antenna gain of terminal user (β, 2) at direction εm n, gβ(ξβ β2) is the satellite antenna gain of cell β at direction ξm β2 and fβ2(εβ2) denotes the channel fading of user (β, 2) at direction εβ2. (cid:8)α β is the polarization isolation factor between cell β and α. then, for satellite user (α, 1) shown in fig. 1, the transmission capacity with unit bandwidth can be expressed as ieee systems journal

fig. 2. terrestrial user's spectrum preference.

where ρα1 is the transmit power of user (α, 1), n0(εα1) denotes the noise, gα1 and gα denote the antenna gain and dβ2 denotes the straight line distance from user β2 to the satellite system.

iii. spectrum optimization pricing

in this paper, the satellite spectrum allocation is carried out in the mode of spectrum trading, where satellite systems offer price on the satellite spectrum with differential transmission qualiies to potential satellite users. all the available satellite bands are divided into uniform channels for centralized selling. beides, since the fading characteristics and external interference of various satellite bands vary apparently, in the system model, we classify the satellite spectrum into three types with high, medium, and low qualities. various spectrum qualities mean different transmission capacities for the satellite users. hence, it can be envisioned that high quality spectrum is worthy of higher price.

based on the transmission capacity given above, for spectrum i, the utility function of a satellite user involving in this spectrum trading can be given as

where ci denotes the transmission capacity or spectrum quality depicted in (3), b denotes the bandwidth, pi denotes the specrum price, (cid:10) is monetary coefficient, which transforms capacity to uniform unit. besides, ε denotes weighted coefficient. in this paper, we define a preference parameter θ locating in [θ1, θ3] to describe terrestrial user's preference on three kinds of satellite spectrum, as shown in fig. 2. to be specific, if a user j would like to pick up a high quality spectrum, its θj approaches to θ3. to further formulate the pricing problem, we further introduce a nonpreference coefficient θb to depict a balancing preference state, which means the satellite terminal has no preference for adjacent spectrum. as shown in fig. 2, θ(cid:2) t = bc1b − εp1 = kθ(cid:2) u c2 b = t ε(p1−p2) (cid:8)b(c1−c2) . similarly, we obtain θ(cid:2)(cid:2) b is achieved by u c1 bc2b − εp2. thus, we haveθ (cid:2) (cid:8)b(c2−c3) . ⇒ kθ(cid:2) where di denotes the demand function, n denotes the user numer, mi denotes the marginal cost for the satellite systems, and g(θ) is the probability density function (pdf) of preference paameter. then, we give the detailed expressions of profit function and corresponding optimal pricing for spectrum i. similar conlusions are applicable to spectrum ii and iii. therefore, for spectrum i, based on (5), we have

apparently, we have to identify the pdf of user preference parameter so as to solve (6) and achieve the specific satellite sysem's function on spectrum i eventually. due to the randomicity of user preference, a normal distribution characteristics can be assumed in condition of massive data.

proposition 1: when terrestrial user's preference parameter θ is subject to stochastic normal distribution, satellite systems can reap profits on spectrum i as (cid:11) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:13)

proof: to identify satellite system's profit, we deduct (6) as

. by utilizing circle to approxmate to the integral area and adopting polar coordinate format, (12) can be converted into (cid:15) (cid:10) 2π 3

therefore, we obtain the satellite system's profit on

(cid:2) system's utility function for

satellite spectrum ii and spectrum iii can be expressed as similarly, the

in the light of essential conditions of pure nash equilibrium, by taking the derivations of profit functions mentioned above, we acquire the iterative optimal spectrum pricing at step k + 1 as

for this optimal pricing solution, the following two points

should be noted. (13)

remark 1: on the basis of debreu's equilibrium existence theory , for optimization strategy si = p∗ i along with utility function fi = πi, nash equilibrium's existence can be ensured since the following sufficient conditions are met.

1) in limited eucidean space, given strategy function si can

be concluded to be a nonempty and compact subset.

2) for the strategy combination s, utility function fi is con

tinuous and concave.

remark 2: to make sure the pricing method for satellite spectrum meaningful, the iterative algorithm we proposed above should be convergent. based on the pricing solution given in (10), the equations can be rewritten in the following jacobi marix form:

when ρ(u −1w ) < 1 holds, spectrum pricing pk

i converges to a fixed point. back to the proposed algorithm, we can easily derive the jacobi matrix and the corresponding maximal eigenalue. by properly arranging pricing algorithm's parameter, we can make sure ρ(u −1w ) < 1. furthermore, the oscillating point of the iterative curve appears when ρ(u −1w ) = 1. (14)

iv. numerical results

in this section, simulation tests are performed to testify the performances of the proposed solution. in this case, satellite sysems work in the mode of channelized time division multiple acess (tdma) in which external interferences incurred by other satellite networks are assumed to be ignored. further, suppose the multibeam satellite system has 16 beams, and each beam's radius is 200 km. in each cell, ten satellite users randomly locate. we consider that the interference in each beam are mainly caused by spectrum reuse in multibeam network. furthermore, for the proposed iterative pricing algorithm, we set the initial spectrum (0) i = 0.01. other pricing for three kinds of quality channels as p related parameters are set as θ1 = 1, θ2 = 5, θ3 = 10, b = 1, (cid:10) = 2, ε = 1.2, n = 10.

as shown in figs. 3 and 4, the spectrum pricing of satelite systems are shown with different parameter settings. since the proposed algorithm is iterative, the curves finally converge. in fact, a convergence coefficient can be added to the integral term in (10) to adjust convergent speed of the algorithm. the satellite spectrum price can be affected by many factors, such as spectrum quality, user preference, monetary coefficient, etc. wherein, spectrum quality and user preference play a critical fig. 5. satellite systems' profits.

role. in fig. 3, the spectrum pricing rises apparently with the increase of spectrum quality. for satellite systems, high quality spectrum means high marginal cost and carries more profit exectation, thus relatively high pricing is reasonable. besides, we can obtain from fig. 4 that different preference distributions of terrestrial users influence spectrum pricing distinctly. in this cirumstance, linear distribution implies that the user's preference degree increases directly when the spectrum quality is going up. in the conditions of urgent spectrum demand or sufficient budet, terrestrial users will be more likely to pick a better channel. in our proposed scenario, we set the mean ν of the normal disribution less than θ2, thus a relatively lower pricing is attained. furthermore, we give the satellite systems' profits under our spectrum pricing strategy in fig. 5. in fig. 5, the system profit changes like a para curve with the increase of spectrum pricing. it can be concluded that high price does not mean more profits generally. thus, too high spectrum pricing will harm potential consumers' interest and purchasing desire. as a result, the profits of satellite systems will suffer damage eventually. in addition, we obtain from fig. 5 that the high pricing spectrum has faster profit decrease compared with other types of spectrum.

in this paper, we have investigated the spectrum optimization problem for satellite networks in cases of multibeam transmision with heterogenous user preferences. the main contribution of this paper lies in that we introduce a pricing based method to carry out spectrum allocation in satellite networks so as to inspire participants and enhance spectrum efficiency within a market driven mechanism. during the course, we depicted inomogeneous user preferences on differential satellite spectrum and formulate the problem by using hotelling mathematical model. essential analysis and discussion on existence of nash equilibrium and rationality of iterative convergency have been provided. numerical results were given to testify the proposed method's performances.