stochastic geometry based analysis of leo satellite communication systems

anna talgat, mustafa a. kishk and mohamed slim alouini

abstract—this letter studies the performance of a low earthrbit (leo) satellite communication system where the locations of the leo satellites are modeled as a binomial point process (bpp) on a spherical surface. in particular, we study the user coverage probability for a scenario where satellite gateways (gws) are deployed on the ground to act as a relay between the users and the leo satellites. we use tools from stochastic geometry to derive the coverage probability for the described setup assuming that leo satellites are placed at n different altitudes, given that the number of satellites at each altitude ak is nk where 1 ≤ k ≤ n. to resemble practical scenarios where satellite communication can play an important role in coverage enhancement, we compare the performance of the considered setup with a scenario where the users are solely covered by a fiber connected base station (referred to as anchored base station or abs in the rest of the paper) at a relatively far distance, which is a common challenge in rural and remote areas. using numerical results, we show the performance gain, in terms of coverage probability, at rural and remote areas when leo satellite communication systems are adopted. finally, we draw multiple system level insights regarding the density of gws required to outperform the abs, as well as the number of leo satellites and their altitudes.

index terms—stochastic geometry, binomial point process,

satellite communications have a great potential to achieve the ultimate goal of providing wireless coverage worldwide, including rural and remote areas which are still lacking proper service around the globe . particular attention has been recently given to leo satellites for providing wireless coverge, due to their relatively low latency and cheaper launching costs . this has motivated various companies to invest in launching large number of leo satellites with the purpose of providing satellite based cellular service, such as spacex, amazon, and oneweb .

in this letter, using tools from stochastic geometry, we study the performance of leo satellite based communication systems given the altitudes of the satellites, the number of satellites at each altitude, and the density of the gws. for that setup, we derive the coverage probability as a function of the aforementioned system parameters. in addition, we consider a practical use case where satellite communication systems are deployed to enhance coverage in remote and rural areas. for that purpose, we compare the coverage probability of the satellite based communication system in such regions with the coverage probability in case of relying on the nearest abs, which is typically located at far distances from rural and remote areas. before providing more details regarding the contributions of this paper, we first discuss the related literature in the next subsection.

a. related work

performance analysis of satellite communication systems is essential for efficient implementation and design of such systems. various aspects of such systems are investigated in literature such as the influence of the elevation angle and the altitude on the coverage area , the influence of adopting non orthogonal multiple access (noma) , secrecy in uavided satellite terrestrial systems , and overlay spectrum sharing . furthermore, many works have focused on deriving an accurate channel model for the communication links between satellites and ground stations , , where it was shown that shadowed rician (sr) model is the most accurate. one of the closest works in literature is . in this work, authors studied a setup where the locations of the leo satellites are modeled as a bpp on a spherical surface. compared to the work in , this paper has the following differences: (i) we consider a more general setup where satellites are deployed at various altitudes (multiple concentric spherical surfaces), which enables more general results, (ii) we adopt sr fading for the channel between the satellite and the gw, instead of rayleigh fading adopted in , and (iii) we provide useful insights for a specific use case of satellite communications in rural and remote areas. more details about the contributions of this paper are provided next.

we consider a system setup where the locations of the satellite gws are modeled as a poisson point process (ppp) on the ground and the leo satellites are modeled as bpp to resemble on a set of spherical surfaces. in particular, practical scenarios, we assume that satellites are deployed on n spherical surfaces sk where the number of satellites on sk is nk for 1 ≤ k ≤ n. for that setup, we study the coverage probability of a typical user on the ground as the joint coverage probability of the user gw link and the gw satellite link. furthermore, we compare the coverage of such setup with the scenario where coverage is provided by a terrestrial base station (referred to as anchored base station or abs in the rest of the paper) that is located far from the user, which resembles typical challenges in rural and remote areas. unlike abs, the gw stations do not require underground fiber optic connections that need many infrastructures, making it easier and cheaper to deploy gws in rural areas. using numerical results, we show the deployment of gws to enable 1

fig. 1. system model for n level of spheres concentric with the earth

satellite communications enhances coverage probability when the distance to the nearest abs is beyond a specific threshold. finally, we show how this distance threshold is affected by various system parameters such as the density of the gws, the altitudes of the satellites, and their numbers.

we consider a setup as represented in fig. 1 where leo satellites are deployed at n different altitudes. each altitude ak constitutes a sphere sk, ∀1 ≤ k ≤ n over which nk leo satellites are uniformly distributed. the radius of each sphere sk is rk = re + ak, where re is the radius of the earth. the communication between the leo satellites and the ground users is relayed through gws located on the ground. the locations of the gws are modeled as a ppp with density λgw. the transmit power of the satellite is denoted by ρs while the transmit power of the gw is ρg. in the rest of the paper, we will refer to the link between the satellite and gw as the s gw link while the link between the gw and the user will be referred to as the gw u link. under these links which can be shown as in fig. 2, we study the network performance at a typical user in terms of the coverage probability.

for the s gw link, the received signal power at the gw is r = ρs|hs|2, ρg (1) where hs represents the channel fading for the s gw link and is represented as description

we consider an association policy where the user associates with its nearest gw, while the gw associates with its nearest leo satellite. hence, the user is considered in coverage if the following conditions are satisfied: (i) the signal to noise ratio (snr) for the s gw link is above a predefined threshold γg and (ii) the snr for the gw u link is above a predefined threshold γu. hence, the coverage probability is defined as follows

given that the satellites are randomly located on the set of spheres {sk}, the distance d is a random variable. in the authors' work , the distribution of d was derived as shown in the below lemma.

as described in (6), in order the to compute the coverage and probability, p gw −u is a well established result in literaov ture and is provided in the following lemma for completeness.

lemma 2. the coverage probability for the gw u link is

now, the main result in this paper, which is the derivation

theorem 1. the coverage probability for the s gw link for an arbitrarily located gw under a shadowed rician fading channel is gateway abs user

fig. 2. satellite communication systems can highly enhance coverage for under served remote and rural areas.

where fd( is expressed in lemma 1 and c = proof: see appendix a. y) is the pdf of contact distance distribution that

remark 1. the the lower incomplete gamma function can be approximated at high snr (ρs → ∞) such as γ (cid:16) (cid:17)

remark 2. the integral in the theorem can be numerically evaluated by truncating the infinite series.

c. coverage enhancement in remote locations

in order to evaluate the performance gains from the deployent of satellite communication systems in rural and remote areas, we consider a scenario where, for a given rural area, the nearest abs is located at a distance r, as shown in fig. 2. the value of r is typically large at rural and remote areas, leading to relatively low coverage probability. in such a scenario, the coverage probability when the satellite communication system is absent is

where ρa is the transmission power of the abs, and assuming rayleigh fading due to the scatters can be caused by mounains, hill, and trees in rural areas. as we mentioned in the contribution section, extending the fiber connections to rural areas requires a lot of digging, which increases the costs. therefore, to consider a practical scenario, it is reasonable to assume that the distance to the nearest abs in a rural area is much larger than the distance to the nearest gw. the above scenario will be used as a benchmark to evaluate the performance enhancement in the numerical results section, which is provided next.

iv. numerical results

in this section, we verify the derived expressions using monte carlo simulations. in addition, we study the influence of various system parameters on the performance of the considered system and on the performance gain in rural and reote areas. the system parameters used in the simulations are summarized in table ii. in addition, we assume that γg = γu (both are denoted as γth in the figures) and ρs = ρg = ρa. in all the figures, markers represent the derived analytical results while the solid lines represent the monte carlo simulations. 3

fig. 6. coverage probability versus threshold and density of gw for different values of rain fading attenuation. fig. 4. coverage probability versus density of ppp for gws, λgw

fig. 5. coverage probability versus distance abs u, r

in fig. 3(a), we show that the satellite user (s u) coverage probability is limited by the gw u coverage at low values of 15 10 5051015 s u; n1=500; a1=500 km

γth, while at higher values it is limited by the s u coverage. in fig. 3(b), we plot the coverage probability for n = 1 and 4