evolving cyber attack threats put at risk automatic closed loop systems to be incorporated in the smart grid. wide area control systems are particularly vulnerable to signal spoofing attacks due to sensor remoteness and dependence on satellite communication for time synchronization. a successful cyber attack on a wide area controller has the potential to reduce relative stability of the power system or worse, destabilize it. as such, detection algorithms must be deployed as defense against such attacks with the ability to autonomously correct for detected tampering or misoperation. the spoof catch and restore routine (scr2), a combination of three realime spoof detectors, each requiring limited information about the plant, is presented. nonlinear simulations of a compromised wide area control system deployed in the western interconnection show the effectiveness of scr2 in detecting both delay type and counterfeit type spoofing attacks on wide area sensors. john f. o'brien a, *, dakota roberson *,b a university of wyoming b university of idaho

wide area damping control (wadc) facilitated by active power modulation on high voltage dc (hvdc) transmission lines provides stability augmentation for electrical interconnections plagued with lightly damped electromechanical dynamics . inherent in such sysems is the potential for problematic torque imbalance spanning large geographic regions. insufficient damping torque contributes to improperly damped oscillatory behavior and may lead to oscillatory instability . appropriately designed and implemented wadc faciliated by hvdc ameliorates undesirable periodic behavior via active power modulation.

the type of control system considered here modifies the active power reference which is typically calculated based on the necessary bulk power delivery from one hvdc converter station to the other through an additive modulation signal. use of this topology relies on additional sensors and associated networks, namely phasor measurement units (pmus), alternatively known as synchrophasors . while hvdc sysems traditionally rely on legacy supervisory control and data acquisiion (scada) equipment action for automatic power scheduling adjustment (in conjunction with operator oversight and modification), the addition of faster, more complex sensor and communication equipent provides additional flexibility, while introducing new attack vectors for exploitation by would be cyberattackers. these attack vecors are particularly troublesome due to their reliance upon satellite communication for synchronization. coupled with modern digital hvdc control equipment, several potential cyber based vulnerabilities are identified.

renovations of line commutated converter (lcc) and igbt based voltage sourced converter (vsc) hvdc systems have replaced the vast majority of antiquated switching and control equipment (e.g., mercury arc valves, analog controllers, etc.) used for measurements, communiation, and compensation with relatively compact digital systems . inherent advantages include improved simplicity and efficiency while minimizing maintenance and replacement costs. an improvement in the expediency with which the systems may be renovated reduces overall outage time for maintenance and upgrades, as well. however, as demonstrated by the continuous barrage of recent successful, high impact cyberattacks of infrastructure, it systems, banking systems, social media networks, and entertainment enterprises, risk is increased dramatically in purely digital deployments .

while it is apparent that risks associated with increased digitization of such critical infrastructure systems continue to increase, the subtantial quantities of bulk and modulated power flow associated with hvdc increase the importance of ensuring sufficient action is taken to reduce the risk of instability. thus, the application of feedback loops to introduce power modulation on the order of hundreds of megawatts represents a significant evolution toward the automated smart grid, while simultaneously increasing risk. spoofing attacks, for example, threaten stability by forcing errant active power command signals to be provided to the hvdc system .

examples of these attacks include meaconing (i.e., record and proide a delayed delivery by overpowering authentic signals) and signalevel spoofing (i.e., smooth delayed delivery of counterfeit signals) of synchrophasors [6 8], the effect of which on wide area control systems is to introduce a time delay (and thus a nonminimum phase contribuion) in the feedback system that threatens closed loop stability. methods to defeat open loop pmu spoofing attacks include gps carrier to noise based detection and cross correlation peak offset based detection . nonlinear or randomly varying time delay is also considered as a scenario ameliorated using a robust linear quadratic gaussian controller . many of these approaches are specific for a given attack scenario, and may rely on detailed system models and asumptions regarding delay characteristics, or require substantial computation time, limiting their applicability to the real time closed loop control system. open loop pmu networks resilient to various spoof attacks have been proposed recently but have yet to be widely adopted in industry and are not directly applicable to closed loop systems such as the wadc proposed herein [11,12].

to contribute to the growing body of literature and interest in this area of research, this work builds on a widely accepted wadc archiecture to address concerns regarding pmu spoofing in such systems by providing a secure by design solution for various realistic spoofing scenarios. the concept herein exploits knowledge of specific wadc design features and nominal behavior characteristics to create early warnings and indicators of spoofing, providing ample time for the sysem to apply remedial actions useful for retaining stability (i.e., switching of corrupted measuring device(s).) spoofing attack scenarios are expanded beyond manipulation of gps timing to include counterfeit signals designed to reduce wide area control performance and defeat state of the art delay based detection schemes.

the paper is organized as follows: wide area control is summarized, pmu security protocols assumed by the authors to be implemented at the time when wide area control becomes operational are described, the spoof catch and restore routine (scr2) to defeat spoof attacks is introduced, and results of simulations using a nonlinear model of the western interconnection are provided to show the efficacy of the scr2. the method described in this paper will provide robust detection caabilities necessary for the secure implementation of wide area control.

inter area stability is threatened by increasing complexity of the smart grid. inter area oscillatory dynamic behavior, i.e., damping and frequency, degrade under the influence of high speed switching equipent, increased ac transmission line loading, automatic voltage reguator tuning parameters, and the increased penetration of green sources of power . an additional drawback which precludes full utilization of installed equipment is increased tie line oscillation amplitudes which serve to reduce transmission capacity, potentially bottle necking new generation (e.g., remote wind turbines).

these problems are particularly acute in systems such the western energy coordinating council (wecc) where significant geographical separation between sources in the north and loads in the south create challenging system dynamics. examples of other systems with known problematic dynamic behavior include the nordic systems in norway and finland , and australia . thus, the smart grid must include wide area control systems consisting of an actuator a(s) (hvdc line or energy storage pairs capable of sufficient phase limited power delivery at system modal frequencies), feedback compensation c(s), and multiple phase angle sensors h(s) (e.g., synchrophasors). the plant model, p(s), is derived using small signal assumptions and represents the linear input output relationship between active power and relative rotor angle. significant literature exists detailing the plant model and methods for which it may be measured, identified, and approximated [16 21].

an example wide area system is shown in figure 1 where the actutor is the pacific dc intertie (pdci) hvdc line connecting the celilo substation near the dalles, or, to the sylmar substation just north of los angeles, ca . the actuator is subject to a saturation of the reference power pref ± 250 mw. the sensors are pmus located at each of these substations; the error signal is the derivative of the difference of the angle measurements θe = θ1 (cid:0) θ2. the control bandwidth is in the octave of 2.0 4.0 hz, and the majority of the loop gain resides in the inter area modal frequencies between 0.25 0.85 hz [1,23].

physical security for actuator and compensator is assumed sufficient to ensure equipment is sufficiently tamper proof. it is assumed that pmus serving as wide area sensors can be deployed in locations suffiiently remote to render them vulnerable to electronic or physical attack. a popular scenario for cyber attack is the substitution of a hacked pmu's measurement with a different signal to degrade perforance or threaten stability (spoofing) . this investigation seeks detection algorithms to defeat spoofing attacks on pmus dedicated to wide area feedback control systems.

the implementation of wide area feedback systems represents a profound transition to an automatic control of the power system. the transmission of hundreds of megawatts of power at modal frequencies under computer control, necessary to maintain stability, presents a substantial security risk. while unlikely to be heavily destructive when the power system is well damped, the acquisition of a wide area pmu for nefarious purposes when the system relative stability is limited or during a large contingency event could cause system break up, similar to that experienced in 1996 . it is thus imperative that measures applied for physical and electronic security of pmus resemble those taken for other identified critical infrastructure. such measures include dedicated, concealed, high speed communication between a pmu and the site of compensator calculation.

while researchers have described expected delay scenarios due to signal transport (e.g. network delays) , it is unlikely to assume that such a critical signal would be subject to public sources of distortion. sensor redundancy will be necessary not only to allow switching to alternative sensors when a spoofing attack is detected but also in the (more) likely event of sensor failure. different levels of pmu security are indicated to foil simultaneous signal spoofing (e.g., a visible 'decoy' pmu accompanies a well hidden 'secret' pmu). with these protocols in place, it will be possible to compare pmu signals for detection of anomalies and switch from spoofed pmus to legitimate ones .

4. wide area pmu spoof attacks

expected spoofing attacks are segregated into two types: an introuced delay and a counterfeit signal. the introduction of time delay in a sensor signal provides a nonminimum loop phase delay that can destabilize the feedback system . a delay attack may be applied to one pmu in the pair (asymmetric attack) or applied to both (symmetric). the latter of the two is implemented either by assuming that a sample and wait feedback signal is employed, i.e., no control action is taken until both measurements are acquired, or that spoofing control of both pmus is taken simultaneously.

the application of a delay to the difference of these signals is also considered, if the attacker were to gain access to the digitized feedback signal after comparison. figure 2 shows the difference of phase angles at the northern and southern pdci buses in response to a 3 phase fault on a large parallel ac transmission line at t = 5 s. the system is open loop. a delay of 500 ms is introduced linearly starting at t = 5.5 s over a 10 s interval to one of the pmus. a distortion in the angle difference caused by the asymmetric introduction of delay is evident when compared to the nominal signal. this effect may be exploited in spoof detection. the delay function may also be applied to both synchrophasor, i.e. a symetric attack. it is noted that the distortion caused by this delay attack is moderately less severe than the previous case.

lastly, a counterfeit or modification attack is the substitution of the legitimate pmu signal with a synthesized signal; the potentially destailizing effect is obvious. such an attack can be executed in the form of switching the signals of infiltrated pmus or the synthesis of a signal entirely independent of the power system response. examples of such spoofing attacks are provided in subsequent sections.

a holistic detection method consisting of three individual subsystems is proposed to minimize the impact of successfully spoofed wide area pmus on control stability. the detection algorithms are the excessive regeneration detector (erd), the inordinate differential indicator (idi), and the prolonged saturation constraint (psc). the erd, developed in previous work , modifies the loop gain in response to detected positive feedback, while the idi and psc developed here are used to detect spoofing and inordinate responses based on system response and the erd. the specific methodology of each subsystem is described individually.

excessive regeneration detection is deployed to detect positive feedback in the close frequency neighborhood of nominal control crossover. a potential spoof assault is the introduction of time (and hence, phase) delay in one or both of the pmus, the effect of which is excessive loop regeneration. the time delay detection strategy exploits

fig. 2. wide area error signal during asymmetric spoofing, beginning at t = 5.5 s; 500 ms of time delay is introduced linearly to one pmu over 10 s. blue: not delayed. red: delayed. (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) closed loop system behavior influenced by excessive positive feedback and thus the compensation approach is not a function of assumptions related to delay (e.g. the ability to measure delay or assumed delay patterns). gps spoofing attacks attempting to slowly introduce delay are foiled, allowing for additional detection and potential remediation to be enacted while maintaining stability of the system. exploitation of the knowledge of erd responses under nominal vs. cyber compromised response allows for its use as a spoof detector, as stated in the proeeding section.

the foundational building blocks for the excessive regeneration deector is found in fig. 3. r(v) is a function of compensator output v(t). positive feedback, i.e. regeneration, is detected using a scaled variance estimate of the band limited signal to check for energy in the band of frequencies around the expected controller crossover . thus, v(t) is bandpass filtered using b(s) with passband 1.0 (cid:0) 3.0 hz. above average variance, i.e. energy, suggests increased positive feedback due to a diminished phase margin .

several windows of varying length are used to calculate variance. detection logic, as shown in fig. 3, is used to determine the presence of regeneration concern and linear equations q(b) provide a scaling contant 0.25 < k ≤ 1.0, for a maximum possible reduction of (cid:0) 12db of loop gain. note that the gain reduction scheme is designed to be conervative (i.e., detection thresholds set so that regeneration is consisently detected, contributing to a higher overall probability of false alarm). the erd system is stable by the nyquist stability criterion for delays of up to 205 milliseconds and by the circle criterion . additional design details associated with the detector are found in .

5.2. inordinate differential indicator

another spoofing strategy is the substitution of a legitimate pmu signal (or pair of signals). switching synchrophasors or the replacement of the signal with one synthesized are examples of this type of attack. the attacker's challenge is to make a smooth transition as not to make the spoof obvious by discontinuity in the signal (presenting an easily detected condition). thus, a differential estimate is employed to detect significant slope in the pmu signal output.

where k is the sample number, x1a is the pmu angle measurement, fs is the sample frequency, and mi is the slope estimate. the intersection of two conditions is a spoof detection by the inordinate differential indiator (idi).

the first condition indicates excessive slope or rate of change; the secnd disallows detection near a phase wrap transition at ±180∘. idi possesses the advantage of instantaneous detection of a spoofing attack, where erd and the prolonged saturation constraint (psc) require time for the system response to indicate a loop violation.

5.3. prolonged saturation constraint

attacks such as those described thus far frequently result in actuator saturation for many cycles of the dominant electromechanical modal frequency. a sample counter is activated when the compensator output exceeds the actuator limit. if the counter is contiguously positive to a selected number of samples, the detector is activated and a pmu switch is executed. large contingencies invariably cause wide area actuator saturation in the first several cycles for controllers with sufficient gain; the threshold number of samples to activate the detector must be careully chosen as not to provide false indications of spoofing. for example, north south actuation in the forthcoming system chosen for simulation is dominated by 0.35 hz modal response. early actuator response is a square wave of approximately 1.5 s half period. a sample counter threshold corresponding to 2 s is indicated for this problem.

psc, like erd, has the advantage of utilizing measurements of atypical system response as indication of anomaly, and thus minimal assumptions are required. the disadvantage vis `a vis idi is the time needed (e.g. dominant mode period) in observation of response before corrective measures are taken (e.g. reduction of loop gain or the incororation of a replacement pmu).

the new control system with all detector methodologies incorpoated is found in fig. 5. erd is used to modify loop gain and as a spoof detector able to provide switching logic to one of n isolated standby synchrophasors h1(s), h2(s), …, hn(s) used to remedy the detected attack. idi and psc are used in combination to inform switching logic for these backup sensors, as well. sensor switching logic is indicated by dashed lines in fig. 5.

to validate the detection and remediation methodologies developed, simulations using a detailed power system model are presented. various spoofing attack types are simulated using combinations of the detection and remediation technologies. simulations in this section focus on delay type attacks , with counterfeit signal injection considered in the sequel. the miniwecc model of the western interconnection (wi) [3,29] is utilized for psc validation. this particular model is impleented in the power system toolbox (pst) open source software in matlab ® . consisting of 34 generators, 2 dc lines, and 171 ac transmission lines, the model captures the significant dynamic behavior present in the wi. the pacific dc intertie (pdci) is the chosen actuator for this system, as it is the most capable within the inter area modal frequency range of this system. transient analysis is assessed utilizing various contingency events distributed throughout the system; however, as a worst case scenario used for demonstrative purposes in this work, a contingency is experienced at five seconds due to a 95 millisecond three phase fault at a large southern steam turbine.

figures 6 and 7 show the closed loop pmu signals and pdci power flow in response to the large steam turbine contingency. convergent power flow on the california oregon intertie (coi), a large north south 500kv ac transmission line of great significance to system stability, is recorded. note that rotor destabilization results in the absence of widerea control.

erd is designed as a real time method of compensation for a spoof delay. its utility is expanded to implementation as a spoof detector upon whose activation executes a change to alternative, uncompromised pmus. figures 8 and 9 compare variable gain functions and coi reponses of erd and erd that switches to an alternative pmu if the mean of k(t) remains below 0.5 for a predetermined interval (2 s, in this scenario). this detector activates at 39.2; k(t) recovers to unity and the oscillations in power flow are absent. during a major transient event in the system. consider an attack in which the pdci control pmus are programmed to introduce delay at a rate of 10 ms applied per second starting 25 s after large amplitude angle changes are measured (large disturbance to the power system). figure 10 shows the coi power flows in response to a palo verde trip at 15 s for a fixed gain controller and the erd. the extraction of loop gain in the erd system in response to excessive regeneration delays the divergence caused by this attack. additionally, the variable gain funcion of the erd system, k(t), is useful in delay detection. figure 11 (red) shows k(t) in response to this attack. the reduction in k(t) at 15 s is in response to actuator saturation at the beginning of the transient. note the loop gain recovers until approximately 40 s at which point the spoof algorithm has applied approximately 150 ms of time delay and erd reduces the loop gain to retain stability. this extended period of erd activity indicates an anomaly and is to be used for a detection scheme described in the sequel.

this attack is modified to apply delay at only the northerly of the two pdci control pmus (asymmetric time delay spoofing). while the power flows in response to this combined contingency/spoof are similar, the variable gain function, k(t), indicates a system under greater stress by the asymmetric delay attack as in fig. 11. the reduced loop gain in the interval between 30 and 60 s in response to the regeneration caused by the asymmetric attack renders the controller less capable of suppressing the transient response to the contingency. this motivates a modification to the erd variable loop gain strategy.

6.2.2. delayed erd activation

erd establishes a temporary trade off of disturbance rejection for relative stability in the presence of regenerative influences. the comination of contingency and pmu spoof is a profound challenge to the wide area controller and motivates a modification of the erd. a modiied algorithm is suggested that delays implementation of the variable gain algorithm until 10 s (approximately 3 periods of the dominant mode) after a threshold pmu measurement is exceeded as indication of a major contingency. this delay allows maximum possible disturbance rejection at the onset of the transient. figures 12 and 13 show k(t) and power flows (respectively) with this modification incorporated; the additional feedback applied earlier in the event by the modified erd more effectively settles the response. it is noted that this approach would fail, should the spoof attack apply substantial delay earlier in the tranient, however these coincidental challenges could not be realistically be defeated by any control method.

7. signal counterfeit attack simulations

the wide area controller is subjected to pmu signal spoofing attacks (substitution of legitimate signals) to test the efficacy of the idi and psc components of the scr2. idi parameters in eq. (2) are γ = 0.05 and β = 0.993. psc counts saturation when the absolute value of applied pdci power exceeds 245 mw; the detector is activated at 2 s of sustained saturation.

consider the case when the wide area system is subjected to a replacement type spoofing attack; at 6.5 s the northern pmu signal is switched with the pmu signal measuring the bus voltage angle near the modeled 'jim bridger' thermal power plant near rock springs, wy. figure 14 compares the resulting pdci modulation to the unmodified response. the attack successfully disables the wide area controller, evidenced by the sustained pdci saturation and system power flows (note the coi power flow in fig. 15).

the psc counter for the spoofed system is shown in fig. 16; the detector activates roughly 2.7 s after the pmu switch. figure 17 depicts the combined states of the idi and psc (value of 1 indicates detection). note that the idi detects the spoof at time of the switch. the northern pmu signal is replaced by a synthetic signal (a 0.9 hz oscillation) at 5.5 s. figure 4 shows the pmu angles in this event. it is noted that this attack incorporates a smooth transition between signals and thus it is expected that the idi is defeated. figure 18 shows the and coi power flows in response to this successful spoofing attack.

the saturation detector with the northern pmu replaced with a sine wave centered at 0.9 hz at 5.5 s causes the detector to trigger at 7.6 s. the slope detector is not triggered. the idi, as anticipated, fails to detect this penetration, while the psc detects the attack 2.1 s after the pmu signal switch.

simulations of the described spoofing attacks are repeated with a strategy of switching penetrated pmus with alternates when the scr2 is activated. the spoofing attack is thwarted by the pmu switch executed in response to the scr2 detection at the 6.5 s. note that the psc is not activated in this case as the system recovers from the attack quickly.

this pmu switching mitigation strategy is applied to the faked pmu signal attack. pmu angles and power flows in response the northern pdci pmu signal replaced with an artificial signal indicate. recall the psc successful detection at 7.6 s; the spoofed pmu is switched at this time resulting in a recovery of reasonable performance. the controller under the influence of legitimate error again saturates pdci which reovers at the second psc activation.

a combination of spoof detection algorithms that united constitute the spoof catch and restore routine for application to power system wide area control security is presented. in concert with expected pmu protocols that include signal comparison routines and redundant deployment strategies, the scr2 uses a positive feedback detector and variable loop transmission system to automatically reduce gain with guaranteed stability in response to a surreptitious application of time delay to a pmu signal. excessive differential, i.e., slope, and saturation detectors using knowledge of plant dynamics are deployed to find iregularities in pmu signals and actuator response; a compromised pmu is switched with one undisturbed when detection occurs.

these detection methods are widely applicable to hvdc augmented grids of many sizes; only thresholds and detection durations need to be

fig. 4. angle measurements at the north (blue) and south (red) buses of pdci with northern pmu signal replaced with 0.9 hz sine wave at 5.5 s. (for interretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) fig. 5. scr2 system simultaneously depicting all detection and remediaion strategies.

fig. 6. angle measurements at the north (blue) and south (red) buses of pdci, closed loop. (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

fig. 7. nominal pdci input to system during palo verde contingency.

modified based on system size and associated time constants. these are quite readily adopted across systems of varying sizes and dynamics. additional power system operating conditions incorporating high pentrations of distributed renewable energy resources may be investigated in the future to illustrate the method's sensitivity to nominal distress and fig. 8. erd variable gain function in response to the palo verde contingency and an asymmetric pmu delay spoof (blue is erd, red is erd that switches pmu in response to a time delay attack) (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).

fig. 10. coi power flow for a fixed gain wide area controller (blue) and erd control (red) in response to the palo verde trip and a symmetric pmu delay spoof. erd reduces the effect of the delay spoofing attack. (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) fig. 11. erd variable gain function in response to a palo verde trip and a pmu delay spoofing attack (red is the response to a symmetric delay, blue the response to an asymmetric delay). (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

fig. 12. erd variable gain function in response to the palo verde trip and an asymmetric pmu delay spoofing attack (red is erd, blue is erd with a 10 s delay in variable gain execution). (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

fig. 13. coi power flow for a wide area controller with erd control in response to the palo verde contingency and an asymmetric pmu delay spoof (red is erd, blue is erd with a 10 s delay in variable gain execution). (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) fig. 14. pdci input during palo verde contingency nominal (blue) vs. northern pmu switched to the bridger pmu at 6.5 s (red). (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

fig. 17. spoof catch and restore routine with northern pmu switched to the bridger pmu at 6.5 s. slope detector triggers at 6.5 s (spoof event); the satuation detector triggers at 9.2 s.

fig. 18. coi flow (pu) during palo verde contingency with northern pmu signal replaced with 0.9 hz sine wave at 5.5 s.

renewable penetration in the system. nonlinear simulations of a widerea controller using pdci under spoofing attack show the efficacy of scr2 under delay and signal replacement spoofing attack.

additional future work may investigate additional attack scenarios, including stochastic time delay, as in . other concerns, such as switching the pmu to locations sufficiently removed from the original location so as to introduce additional dynamics into the system, will be addressed, as well. the concept of sensor/actuator collocation is comlex, as nonminimum (right half plane) zeros often accrue, potentially resulting in lower control performance, an inverse initial response, and stability concerns. a thorough investigation of this phenomenon will be investigated in the future.

credit authorship contribution statement

john f. o'brien: methodology, software, data curation, writing original draft, visualization, investigation. dakota roberson: concepualization, writing review & editing, supervision.