terrestrial satellite hybrid backbone communication network for smart power grid

chuang denga*, xingquan xiaoa, zhong fua, ge liua, hongchang yanga, junyong liub

a smart power system demands a strong and self healing communication system with greater capacity. in china, as the ultra high voltage transmission lines and large scale interconnected grids are expanding throughout the nation, disaster tolerant communication network is essential for reliable system operation and control. in this paper, we propose a hybrid communication network utilizing both terrestrial and satellite links to improve the system reliability. the adaptive link selection protocol at network layer is developed to facilitate the network integrity. a modification of transport protocol over satellite communication is also proposed to better exploit the limited bandwidth resources. the performance analysis and field trial of the proposed scheme based on the practical network configuration in sichuan power grid is thoroughly studied. the results showed a great bandwidth saving of satellite resources without loss of network integrity.

© 2011 published by elsevier ltd. selection and/or peer review under responsibility of university of electronic © 2011 published by elsevier ltd. selection and/or peer review under responsibility of icsgce 2011 science and technology of china (uestc).

power system communication networks are essential for system operations and control. the physical terrestrial wired transmission modalities communications such as optical fibers and power line communication (plc), as well as wireless communications such as satellite communications (sc), 3g or wireless sensor networks (wsn). for wide area network (wan) which is the backbone network which connects power generators, substations and control center together, a wide band digital data network is required to reliably transmit and control the icsgce 2011: 27 30 september 2011, chengdu, china

a sichuan electric power corporation , sgcc, chengdu, china b department of electrical engineering, sichuan university, chengdu, china

keywords: hybrid, satellite communication, backbone network, smart grid. www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

include wired system . in china, a dedicated communication network for power systems utilizing optical fiber composite to optical fiber (opgw) for transmission medium is largely deployed throughout the nation. compared to plc, optical fiber could provide greater communication capacity and network robustness. however, these wired terrestrial communications are very vulnerable to the natural disaster. the communication cables are distributed along the long distance transmission line through many geographically tough areas. in 2008 sichuan earthquake, one third of generators and substations lost contact with control center due to the destruction of the optical fiber communication networks, an important cause of blackout in the catastrophe. after the earthquake, the satellite communication was proposed to use as the backup communication for power system to resist potential natural disaster.

the modern satellite communication system could provide reliable broadband digital communications . the installation of satellite communication is of great mobility and flexibility. due to its wireless nature without terrestrial relay, satellite communication has a strong capacity against natural disasters. however, the radio frequency resources for satellite communication are limited, making satellite communication infeasible as a prime backbone network for power systems. a better solution is to use satellite communication as a backup only when optical fiber fails. based on this scenario, several problems are needed to be addressed for a feasible and economical operation. first, the automatic link switch between terrestrial and satellite must be established for network self healing functionality. we developed an adaptive link selection protocol to realize automatic link switch based on the ip based data network. we also developed revised tcp protocol based on the space communication protocol standards transmission protocol (scps tp)[4 6]. this revision greatly improved the performance over lossy wireless channels with large latency. our results showed that bandwidth efficiency is improved by 60% under typical channel state in practice. through the methods above, we have achieved a stronger hybrid communication network for power systems with greater capacity against disaster and economical investments.

fig 1 shows the illustration of the network setup. one of the modern satellite communication systems utilizes a very small aperture terminal (vsat) ground station for physical layer communications. by using small size rf units and highly integrated satellite modem, a vsat ground station could provide ip based broadband communications which can be readily infused into existing networks. there are some distinct properties needed to be addressed for satellite communication compared to terrestrial networks. 2. satellite communication for power systems unlike optical fiber communication which could provide extremely large bandwidth, the satellite communication suffers from many factors shared by all wireless communication technologies. the transmit power of both ground station and satellites are constrained due to practical considerations such as size and cost. the scarce radiofrequency resources for satellite communication also impose serious limitations for bandwidth. as governmental and commercial demands on satellite communication grow, the limited bandwidth occupancy will face a lot more contentions from end users. the cost is also an important consideration. the rate of bandwidth usage is very high and proportion to usage duration, making the cost of operation hard to cut down. based on the limits above, satellite communication cannot be used as the prime backbone communication and is often used as a backup for cables. a balance between cost and integrity must be found to economically and reliably operate the systems. for satellite scada system in practical power grids in sichuan, the average bandwidth needed for each substation is around 20 to 200kbps. a 2mbps satellite channel could sustain 50 substations to transmit simultaneously, around 30% of all important generators and substations for sichuan grids.

the greatest distinct between satellite communication and other wired/wireless communications are the transmit latency. the most commercial satellite communication systems use satellite at geosynchronous orbits which is 36,000 km high above the equator since the overall cost for such systems is low compared to near earth orbits satellite systems. this distance naturally introduces the round trip latency at about 250ms. in power systems, ems/scada systems update the grid information every several seconds. so they are sufficiently tolerable to latency induced by satellite communication. although some delayensitive services cannot rely on satellite communication (e.g. protective information), the ems/scada could provide enough grid operation information necessary for control center when emergency happens.

the internet mainly relies on terrestrial communications such as optical fibers which have an extremely low bit error rate due to low noise of its transmission medium. the satellite channel, however, often reaches a ber at 10e 5 to 10e 7 due to unstable wireless environments. the low quality of satellite link will cause the data loss due to packet corruptions which is much more often than in terrestrial environments. the error correction mechanism at transport and network layer must be introduced to address the problem.

the star topology is often used in satellite communications. in star topology, a point to multiple points' mode is used. this is especially suitable for many industrial applications including power systems where multiple substations send data directly to a single control center. mesh topology is also used in some scenarios. in mesh network, each point may connect to multiple points. in our system, we mainly study the communications between control center and remote substations. thus a star topology will be used.

the main mac for satellite are time division multiple access (tdma) and frequency division multiple access). tdma allows multiple end users access the channel with a single carrier. in tdma, slotted access and contention based carrier sensing multiple access can be used for mac. for this mode, bandwidth efficiency is better exploited especially for sparse data. since the contention based access mechanism is in use, additional latency due to data collisions will be introduced. fdma allocate a determined carrier for each user, ensuring a dedicated transmission channel which is contention free. for non intermittent high throughput data transmission, fdma will secure better performance at the cost of high bandwidth resources. in practical power systems, each substation may require a large and continuous data flow for system information. however, as a backup for cable communication, satellite networks are idle when terrestrial cable communication works. an always on fdma mode will bring unnecessary cost in bandwidth occupancy. based on the circumstances above, we propose a hybrid mac scheme described below.

during standby period a narrowband tdma carrier is established to manage the data network. in such mode, only low throughput network management data are transmitted. each remote substation maintains a standby mode. when cable communication fails, the substation is triggered to establish a dedicated broadband carrier, entering fdma mode for high throughput data transmission. when data transmission is end, the substation could change back to idle mode. this cost effective hybrid mode eliminates the unnecessary bandwidth occupancy without compromise on network performance.

in power systems, ethernet based iec60875 5 104 is mostly used in satellite scada/ems systems. this can be readily connected to satellite modems which also use standard ethernet and ip protocol. the satellite modems have limited routing capability since they are basically the physical layer devices. in practical systems, a complicated data network with a variety of network layer protocol is used. for instance, multiple label switch and virtual private network (mpls/vpn) are used to securely differentiate different type of services and qos control. this mpls label cannot pass through the satellite modem due to its limited process capability at network layer. we developed a new protocol to handle this problem to be elaborated in subsection iii. fig. 2. tdm/fdm hybrid mode for satellite communications systems

2.5. communication interface and network protocol substation n

the setup of terrestrial hybrid data network of power system is illustrated in fig x. aside from the existing terrestrial configurations, the satellite link is added. the network has n virtual private network (vpn) to support different types of services. different mpls labels are added to the data from these vpns to enable mpls routing through label switch router (lsr) in the data network. since the satellite modem has minimum network functionality, it does not support mpls labeled switch. to overcome this problem, mpls gateway pair is used to address the mpls label in order for the packet to pass through the satellite modem. the detail will be elaborated in next section. tcp accelerator is to modify the tcp protocol to optimize the transport performance and will be elaborated later.

the terrestrial networks are used for primary communications. as designed, satellite link is used as backup channel. the dynamic routing algorithm (ospf) will allocate greater link selection weight on terrestrial routes based on bandwidth, latency and other network properties. when the terrestrial link is disabled, ospf will automatically switch the next hop to satellite links. when packets arrive at satellite modem, the modem will switch to working mode, forward the packet to destination mode and establish a dedicated channel (scpc) for p2p communication by looking up preconfigured static routing table. after recovery of terrestrial links, the link selection will automatically switch back to original routes. the automatic link switch between terrestrial and satellite network function can be realized by the abovementioned method.

the satellite modems are mainly designed for convert baseband ethernet signals to radiofrequency electromagnetism. although these modems are generally using ethernet and ip as the data interface, they only have limited l2/l3 process capacity compared to dedicated switch and router. the practical 3. communication protocol for hybrid network considerations such as manufactory technology and economical design are the probable causes. some advanced and modern network technologies such as mpls protocols are not implemented in such modems. to overcome this obstacle, we developed a dedicated device to process the mpls label.

fig 4 shows the basic mechanism for mpls gateway. to establish label switch route, routers will exchange mpls labels using bgp labels. when these bgp labels pass through the mpls gateway, they will be copied and the corresponding mpls label information will be stored in mpls gateway. the source/destination ip and the corresponding mpls label will form a lookup table. the packet from terminal a pass through the mpls enabled router. mpls label is then added to the packet and the packet is forward to satellite link. the gateway will drop the mpls label and the packet is now in standard ip format. this standard ip packet passes through the satellite modem and arrives at the other end. by passing the mpls gateway b, the standard ip packet will be recovered to mpls packet based on the look up table stored in the gateway. this method is a very straightforward way to address the problem. the gateways themselves do not exchange mpls labels. instead, they only learn mpls labels from neighbor pe router. thus this method is very fast and bandwidth efficient.

we build up a test environment completely based on the real setup of sichuan power automation data network. we use five routers to simulate the setup of one control center and four substations. two vpn are setup for the network. vpn1 is for realtime services (e.g. ems, wams, voip, etc) with data rate around 500kbps. vpn2 is for non realtime services, with burst data rate 100kbps every 10 seconds. the satellite link bandwidth is set to 128kbps for standby mode and 2048kbps for working mode. a geosynchronous satellite covering sichuan is used. at first the terrestrial links are used to support the dataflow. after the dataflow is stabilized, we cut down the terrestrial links and test the link establishment time of the satellite network. after the satellite link is established, we recover the terrestrial link and test the link recovery time. within 30 tests, the average link establishment time is 13 seconds and average link recovery time is 9 seconds. the results showed that the network setup and mpls gateway can successfully achieve the designed goal. the link selection between terrestrial and satellite is fully automatic. although the switch process may cause several seconds communication failure, they are worthwhile compared to the improvement of the network robustness due to backup satellite link. in satellite scada/ems systems, the system information are reliably transported using tcp at transport layer. traditional tcp is mainly used in internet which is running in terrestrial environments. however, satellite communication has several significant differences at physical and network layers, making standard tcp insufficient to sustain efficient transport performance. the major differences between terrestrial and satellite links and proposed solution are listed in table 1.

the abovementioned different properties of terrestrial and satellite communication drives to several modification of traditional tcp to better adapt the satellite environment. based on the satellite scps tp protocol, several tcp protocol modifications are proposed below.

in standard tcp, the sender will only retransmit the packet after it receives the ack of previous packets. the traditional tcp uses cumulative acknowledgements which only acknowledge the last received ordered packets. the high ber and large round trip delay may cause many misordered packets at the receiving window, leaving many packet "holes" to be filled in between. however, retransmission of traditional ack mechanism will retransmit some duplicate packets which have already been received. we replace the tcp acknowledgement (ack) into selective negative acknowledgement (snack). snack uses the normal ack header and an additional variable length field to identify the packet "holes". when an out of sequence queue at the receiver exists, the snack will identify the packet "holes" by defining two parameters: offset and size. the offset identifies the hole position from the ack number and size identifies the "hole length" by mss unit. when a snack is received, the sender selectively resends the lost packet. if multiple "holes" exist at receiver, the variable length option field of snack can include them all in a single ack packet, thus enabling the multiple "holes" to be filled at a single retransmission, thus greatly improve the transport efficiency. since no duplicate packets at receiver are received, the transmission rate can be greatly accelerated.

the standard tcp often runs on terrestrial network which has small rtt and transmission latency. in such scenario, the sender does not need a large window to buffer the packets. with the low latency, ack from receiver will return to sender even before the window being filled. while in satellite environment, the large latency may cause the sender to wait ack from receiver since sender's window is full of buffered packets. in such case, expand the sender's window size is essential for efficient transportation. in standard tcp, the window size is normally set to 16kbytes. the maximum throughput for such setup is computed as table 1. performance index comparison of terrestrial and satellite communication

4.1. selective negative acknowledgement (snack)

window size/rtt = 16kbytes/550ms ≈ 230kbps (1) this rate indicates the highest throughput in satellite link using standard tcp. it means that satellite bandwidth over 230kbps cannot be fully exploited under standard tcp. we must modify the window size to break up this limit. in practice, to achieve the designed maximum throughput of the system, we modify the window size to 128kbytes.

the internet mainly relies on terrestrial communications such as optical fibers which have an extremely low bit error rate due to low noise of its transmission medium. the satellite channel, however, often reaches a ber at 10e 5 to 10e 7 due to unstable wireless environments. thus link outage due to high ber often happens. in standard tcp, sender will mistakenly take the cause of the packet loss as congestion and will reduce the transmission rate (i.e. reduce the congestion sliding window) and double the transmission timer to avoid further congestions. in fact, as fdma satellite system provides the dedicated link for each sender at the physical layer, there is hardly any data low due to congestion in such satellite system. on the other hand, most data loss can attribute to ber. for a packet loss due to ber, the sender should retransmit the packet instantly without changing the transmit rate and timer. there is no need for a slower pace of transmission since congestion is not the cause of the packet loss.

fig. 5. standard setup for end to end tcp connections. fig. 6. modified setup for tcp fraud connections.

the goal of ems/scada data is to collect information from the substations. this telemetry system typically utilizes a high rate uplink for information and a low rate downlink for query. this will introduce an asymmetrical channel in satellite link (e.g. 500kbps for uplink and 5kbps for downlink). if the information is transmitted under tcp, the ack traffic will be greatly generated and overrun the query traffic in the downlink. we use the configurable rtt related frequency to ack the received packets rather than instantly acknowledgement the every segments. this mechanism does not depend on ack clocking therefore allows the acknowledgement rate to be reduced. combined to snack to selectively choose the missing packets in out of order sequence, we can greatly reduce the acknowledgement frequency to avoid overload in downlink.

the normal tcp connection is shown in figxx. in this setup, the tcp establishes an end to end connection and use flow/congestion control mechanism to reliably transmit the data. notice that the connection is passing through the satellite link. the standard tcp cannot cope with the high ber and large latency problems in satellite link, resulting in poor performance and inefficient bandwidth in some practical scenario, the direct modification of tcp protocol at end users is prohibited due to security considerations. in order to leave the end users intact, we use a tcp fraud method to transport the data from original end user to accelerator. by adding tcp accelerator to the satellite link, the original end to end tcp link is cut into three segments: between the sender/receiver and tcp accelerator, a tcp connection remains. between two tcp accelerators, the modified protocol replaces the original one. in such configuration, the accelerator may send fraud ack to "fool" sender before the real ack arrives from the other end. consequently the sender will continuously send the datagram to the accelerator. the tcp fraud cleverly transports the datagram from sender to accelerator with maximum transmission rate, leaving the original end user unmodified. the modified tcp protocol is then applied on the connection between the two accelerators.

we use the same network setup as the last section to test the transmission rate and evaluate the bandwidth efficiency before and after the tcp modifications. we use the satellite channel simulator to simulate different network conditions by setting different values of channel parameters including round trip delay, bit error rate, up/down link asymmetric rate. the parameter setup is listed in table 2.

figure 7 shows the data throughput using standard and modified tcp under a typical satellite channel condition. we can see the great improvement on data throughput using modified transport protocol, demonstrating the validity of the proposed scheme.

fig. 7. performance evaluation of tcp and modified satellite fig. 8. performance evaluation of tcp and modified

scps tp under rtt 550ms, ber 1e 7 and satellite scps tp under different bers up/down link ratio 10:1.

figure 8 shows the performance of tcp acceleration under different bit error rate. we can see the

figure 9 shows the improvement of data throughput under asymmetric channels. it can be inferred table 2. channel parameter setup for performance evaluation