the role of satellite communications in the smart grid

on the overall communication network. for this reason, the future ict infrastructure for the sg must consider any viable technology including those that have been overlooked in the past as satellite communications (satcom).

satcom can provide extensive coverge and rapid installation and deployment in those scenarios in which terrestrial commuication infrastructures do not exist, are too costly, or are not sufficient for the domain speific requirements. in the past, the use of satom in power systems was limited to scada because of the insufficient performance and high costs. now, the role that satcom can play in the sg domain must be rediscussed in light of the improved performance of satcom coupled with the reduction of costs and the varegate quality of service (qos) requirements expected by new sg applications. indeed, it has been forecasted that by 2020, the revenue from satellite services and equipment dedicated to sg applications will total $368 million . based on these considerations, this article gives a thorough overview of how to fruitfully interate satcoms into sg overlay networks to understand the role satcoms can play in diferent application scenarios.

recent trends of satcom toward m2m applications while in the past the primary commercial use of satcom was in one way communications for media services, nowadays two way communicaion systems such as those providing ip services for machine to machine (m2m) applications are increasingly becoming common . also, over the years ground terminal dishes have become smaller and satellite technologies have continously advanced, making the use of satcom more efficient and less expensive. in the past, data rates of a few kb/s were considered cutting edge satellite technology for the provision of ip serices. today, data rates up to a few mb/s are posible with compact equipment.

as a matter of fact, global leaders of satcom systems have started to provide services specifially intended for m2m. inmarsat has launched broadband global area network (bgan) m2m, which can reach a maximum data rate of nearly 500 kb/s, latencies below 1 s, and availability of the service of 99.9 percent. iridium has a network of 66 satellites covering the whole earth with low low moderate high

remote substations and distribution automation distribution lines connect transmission lines to end customers via distribution feeders. substaions transform the voltage levels according to the needs of the t&d lines and are composed of many devices and functions to provide safey and stability of the system. some of the goals of substation and distribution automation are: identification, isolation and restoration of fault locations; and dynamic regulation and reconfigration of feeders, capacitor banks and circuit paths to ensure system stability. thus, substations must be equipped with remote communication so that control and decisions upon these critical operations can be taken remotely. iec 61850 is currently the protocol chosen for this task, and it is designed to run over communication netorks using the ip standard . however, dnp 3 can also be found in older scada systems. the expected latency and availability requirements are high in light of the crucial role performed. the bandwidth requirements are assumed to be high because of the number of devices to pilot . activity requirements are high, since the number of control communications strictly depends on the state of the electric network.

video surveillance of remote sites video surveillance of remote sites is not a new sg application. utilities already utilize satcom to monitor remote assets. nevertheless, this is one of the most expensive and bandwidth consuming application since it requires continuous transmision of data. in this case, latency requirements are low since the application does not have any contraint on actions to take promptly (i.e. below 1 s). also, percentages of availability under 99 percent are acceptable. in case the communication chanel is not available, data can be buffered and sent as soon as possible in a best effort manner.

mobile workforce mobile workforce networks are used by utilities to provide dispatch and maintenance. satellite systems can provide their contribution especially for in vehicle use in blind areas. workforce vehiles can be equipped with satellite equipment or handheld devices can be used, so that communiation can be provided in case cellular services or other wireless technologies are not available, i.e. in hard to reach areas. delays below 200 ms are usually targeted for calls over satellite although latencies up to 1 s are still acceptable. also, setup delays above 1 s are acceptable when beginning a call. the bandwidth necesary usually does not exceed 100 kb/s, while the availability must be high during calls, which of course have variable activity. finally, differnt from the other applications presented so far, mobility requirements are high and should be taken into account when choosing the best satllite features.

electric vehicles the market of evs is annually growing at rates above 20 percent. evs can add value to the optimization of the sg, since they can be seen both as loads and sources for power supply. mobility high

ami backhaul t&d monitoring video surveillance electric vehicles

remote generation plants remote substations and distribution automation mobile workforce t&d monitoring

remote substations and distribution automation video surveillance mobile workforce electric vehicles

fixed allocation (fa): the easiest way to grant channel access is by permanently allocatng a fixed amount of channel resources to the involved users using either time division multile access (tdma), frequency division multiple access (fdma), or code division multiple access (cdma). this solution enables tight control on the delay and complete availability from the data link viewpoint. thus, it is ideal for sg applications needing frequent data transmission such as video surveillance, but also with high requirements on latency and availability, as with t&d monitoring. depending on the criticality of the application, it could also be used with variable data traffic as in the case of remote substations and distribution automation. nevertheless, when the expected traffic is variable, the channel use is less efficient. advantages disadvantages protocols