the impact of spatial temporal averaging on the dynamic statistical properties of rain fields guangguang yang, david ndzi, boris grémont, kevin paulson, misha filip and abdul hadi al hassani

abstract— knowledge of the spatial temporal variation of rain fields is required for the planning and optimization of wide area high frequency terrestrial and satellite communication networks. this paper presents data and a method for characterizing multiesolutions statistical/dynamic parameters describing the spatialemporal variation of rain fields across ocean climate in northestern europe. the data is derived from the nimrod network of rain radars. the characterizing parameters include: (i) statistical distribution of point one minute rainfall rates, (ii) spatial and temporal correlation function of rainfall rate and, (iii) the probability of rain/no rain. the main contributions of this paper are the assessment of the impact of varying spatial and temporal their dependencies on the integration volumes and area sizes, and the model for both temporal and spatial correlation parameters.

index terms—rainfall rate, rain characteristics, radio wave

propagation, statistical model, fitting, modeling.

ain induced attenuation of microwave signals at frequencies above 10 ghz is the dominant dynamic impairment on high capacity satellite and terrestrial links , . the characterization of rain at different spatial ( )and temporal ( ) integration lengths is important as all the rain in the first fresnel zone of a radio link leads to attenuation . network planners and designers of physical layer fade mitigation techniques , require knowledge of rain characteristics at smaller space ( ) and time ( ) scales than are typically available from radar or rain gauge measurements. this provides impetus for the development of rain models which can be used to predict rain rates at fine scales. rain measurements produced by rain gauge, rain radar and satellite, each have strengths and drawbacks . numerical models can be used to address their limitations and integrate their strengths appropriately, , . for example, maseng and bakken proposed a stochastic dynamic timeeries model for rain attenuation field simulation which was later extended to two locations in . a study in shows that maseng's model also applies to rainfall rates with the

guangguang yang, university of portsmouth, anglesea building, anglesea road, portsmouth, po1 3dj, uk. email: guangguang.yang@ myport.ac.uk. tel: +442392842587.

david ndzi, school of computing engineering and physical sciences, university of the west of scotland, paisley, uk, tel: +44(0)1418494286, email:david.ndzi@uws.ac.uk.

boris gremont, university of portsmouth, anglesea building, anglesea

kevin paulson, school of engineering, university of hull, cottingham road, hull, hu6 7rx, uk, tel: +44 (0) 1482 465118. email: k.paulson@ hull.ac.uk

misha filip, university of portsmouth, anglesea building, anglesea road, portsmouth, po1 3dj, uk. email:misha.filip@port.ac.uk. tel: +44 (0)23928 42310.

abdul hadi al hassani, iraq university college, somer building, al

estiqlal st., basrah, iraq. email: hadi.alhassani@iuc.edu.iq. same dynamic parameters. a space time rainfall process model that describes the behavior of the stochastic structure of rain fields was proposed by lecam . many models have subsequently been proposed, i.e. and many assume that rainfall intensity exhibits a lognormal distribution . an understanding of rainfall behavior in both space and time at multi resolutions is important for the development of rain attenuation models . the study in investigated rainfall variability in italy at different time scales from to using both rain gauge and weather radar data. however, this study was limited to the spatial and temporal correlation function of rain rate at different temporal scales. luini investigated the effect of space or time integration on the spatial correlation functions of rain separately but not combined. understanding the effect of combined space time integration on spatial correlation the development of effective fade mitigation techniques as well as the space time rain field simulators. a study by the authors highlighted the importance of space time averaging on rain properties . this paper focuses on the comprehensive study and modeling of the key rain properties over different spatial and temporal integration lengths (ranging from to in space and from and in to investigate how scaling affects the dynamic statistical properties of rain fields over different oceanic regions in north western europe. the main aim is to ameliorate the challenges and cost of obtaining high resolutions rainfall rate characteristics over wide areas. it proposes models that can be used to obtain rain characteristics at multiple space ( ) and time ( ) scales. this paper:  is important for

characterizes rainfall fields over different climatic zones in north western europe based on radar measurements. as rain is irregular in both space and time domains, its key characteristics with varying space time scales at different locations are studied and presented; and

 proposes a new space time statistical rain model for spatial correlation and temporal variation of rain over the whole of north western europe. results of higher order moments of rain fields and an empirical models of rain/no rain statistics are presented.

the rest of this paper is organized as follows; section ii reviews space time rain model implemented in this study. details of the experimental data used are also provided. the methodology used to vary the integration length of radar data in both space and time domains is presented in section iii. section iv describes how to characterize the rain properties as well as the technique used to integrate the data from short to longer integration lengths. section v presents the results of rain rate statistics, spatial and temporal correlation of rain, the 1

probability of rain/no rain and the proposed empirical models. conclusions are drawn in section vi.

ii. space time modelling of rainfall rate

rainfall rate, in mm/h at a particular location and for a particular combination of spatial and temporal integration, is modeled as a lognormal process with mixed probability density function (pdf) :

where denotes the probability of rain occurrence ( ) and * + are the lognormal parameters describing the average annual distribution of rainfall rate. the statistical parameters * + depend on the location ( ) , and the spatial and temporal integration lengths. crane has shown that the spatial correlation function of rain rate depends only on the separation distance between two locations and the spatial correlation function can be assumed to be isotropic i.e. it takes the form ( ) , ( ) ( ) ( ) where | | . the temporal correlation function between rainfall rate at the same location but separated by a duration of | | can be represented by ( ) , ( ) ( ) ( ). the assumptions of stationarity and homogeneity greatly reduce the complexity of rain field characterization. the point statistics (including rain/no rain) and the spatial and temporal correlation function form a basic set of "key characteristics" from which rain fields can be numerically synthesized. in , bell showed how rain fields can be synthesized numerically. however, he assumed that all locations within a wide area share the same statistics. this is unrealistic for large area communication networks as rainfall rate varies from location to location, influenced by factors such as climate, topography, wind, etc. although this problem has been solved by an approach proposed by jeannin in , a detailed study of the rain characteristics is needed to understand the variability of rain, especially those at multiple space and time resolutions.

the rainfall rate data used in this study has been obtained from uk metrological office nimrod radar system in the form of composite spatial maps spanning oceanic climates in north western europe, produced at a temporal interval of and integrated over square regions of dimension . the nimrod data is available from the british atmospheric data centre (badc), one of the natural environment research council for atmospheric sciences. nimrod data is continuously updated and badc ensures the long term integrity of the data. over the uk, nimrod also provides data on a 1 km grid acquired with a sample time resolution of , but with variable spatial resolution depending on the distance to the nearest radar. nimrod data has been validated using rain gauge data by some researchers, i.e. , and a range of data is used to calibrate the radars. some differences between nimrod and rain gauge data are expected due to spatial averaging. the nimrod 1 km data has been shown to yield unbiased estimates of annual 0.01% exceeded rain rates . (a) (b) figure 1: nimrod composite images of precipitation rates for (a) central north western europe with dimension of , resolution and (b) british isles with sampling.

the nimrod network consists of c band weather radars that cover the whole british isles. they scan at high space and time resolution over long distances. four to five radars repeat the scan at different elevations to build d scans of the area from which the best estimates of rain rates on the ground are established (details about nimrod radar system are given in ). a series of composite rain field maps are then produced of rainfall rate samples on a squared cartesian grid covering north western europe. each map contains data cells. however, in this study a grid i.e. a 2000 km square region, in each radar image has been analyzed. this spans the irregular shape covered by the radars. the study area ranges from to in latitude and to in longitude. five years of composite rain radar maps ( to ) have been analyzed in this study. the full dataset consists of more than radar maps with data availability of over for each year. fig. 1(a) shows a typical nimrod radar scan image. the grey color is the area outside the range of the radar network where no rain data is available, and the black color represents the scanned area where data is available. a typical composite rain rate image of the uk is shown in fig. 1(b). the validation of a model's performance requires comparisons of estimates to be made with measured data (e.g. from rain gauge or rain radar) . therefore, the grid uk data can be used to validate the results of an interpolation approach that is applied to the grid radar data for the uk. the nimrod system uses data collected from rhi scans at several elevations to estimate the rain rates at different altitudes, and combines these datasets to predict the rain rate at ground level. due to the complex spatial temporal processing involved, the ground rain rates are not quantized. the processing is described in . the nimrod radar provides rain rate estimates over a large area but the resolution is not high enough for applications in radio propagation. in particular, the design and planning of the next generation satellite networks requires knowledge of rain variation over much shorter scales i.e. a typical fresnel zone of a few tens of meters. because of that, the nimrod data which, is generated every on cartesian grid, does not meet this requirement and hence the work reported in this paper.

rain characteristics at many locations within western europe have been studied to reveal the impact of scaling and space time averaging on the dynamic statistical properties of 2

rain fields. the latitudes and longitudes of five studied locations are listed in table 1.

table 1: latitude and longitude values for five locations discussed in this paper. location latitude longitude

iv. characterisation of rainfall fields

a. rainfall rate the composite map is represented on a cartesian grid and each point contains space time averaged rain intensity information. the average rainfall rate centered on the origin over time t and spatial area a=l2 can be expressed as in :

∫ where ( ) denotes the point rainfall rate in at location and time on a cartesian grid. the interval is the spatial the integration length. each nimrod radar map consists of a cartesian grid of such space time averaged values. each value is an estimate of rainfall rate at a particular instant but the algorithm for deriving the rain rate yields a value consistent with a particular integration period.

b. key characteristics of rain four key rain parameters are needed to develop a spaceime rain attenuation field model . the principal parameter is the annual probability distribution of rain. many studies have shown that point rainfall rate is well modeled as a logormal random variable with a probability density function given by:

where and are the mean and standard deviation of log rainfall rate, respectively. it is possible to transform the complementary cumulative distribution function (ccdf) to a linear relationship as described in . the application of this statistical temporal integration lengths is discussed in section v. estimating and requires a trade off between acquiring a large enough sample to yield significant estimates and remaining within a homogenous climate region of rain regime. the spatial correlation function is the second important characteristic and is expressed as: ( ) √

where and are the rainfall rates (mm/hr) at two locations, 1 and 2, is the cross correlation factor between and and ( ) and are the covariance and standard deviation, respectively. in and , it is assumed that the spatial correlation function of rainfall rate only depends on the separation distance i.e. the rain rate fields are spatially homogeneous, time. these assumptions are mainly valid over small distances and times such that the shape of rain field and intermittence of rain events have no effect. rain fronts and squalls have large linear features which are not homogeneous or isotropic over event scales. theoretically, the correlation in space will be the same 3

in any horizontal direction and therefore can be computed using pairs of rain rates in any orientation. typically, intense rain showers, which cause extreme attenuation, are of short durations. temporal correlation quantifies how rain intensity at one particular location is correlated over different times. temporal correlation is important as it is linked to temporal variation of fade, especially for high elevation links, which is a major input in the design of fade mitigation schemes. the development of effective route diversity or site diversity networks requires detailed knowledge of both temporal and spatial correlation functions of rainfall rate. the temporal correlation function is defined by: the

(5) where and are the point rainfall rates ( ) at two different times and but at the same location. the last important parameter considered in this study is the probability of rain occurrence ( ) in a geographical area, which is chosen to be of a similar size as the spot beam of a satellite network . theoretically, (for which ) represents equally well the expected fraction of the rainy area that one can expect for a satellite, or, the probability of rain occurrence at one point over a period of time . if an unbiased sample of rain maps is available for a homogeneous climate area, then the parameter p0 may be estimated using:

where; is the area experiencing rain within a map, is the total area of the rain map of interest, is the number of maps, is the rainy sample amount at one grid point, represents the total samples (including rain and no rain) at that point over a long period, and is the total number of grid points in the area .

c. integrated rainfall data radar derived space time rainfall data typically span a larger area than rain gauge networks and provides considerably denser spatial sampling. a rainfall rate map may be used to simulate the instantaneous joint fade experienced by all the links in an arbitrary microwave network , . however, the problem lies in the reduced quality originating from the coarse sampling of measured maps as this is linked to the scan rate of the radar. one of the key objectives of this paper is the assessment of the impact of varying spatial integration lengths and temporal integration lengths on the studied quantities. this will be useful to enhance the ability to predict the rain induced attenuation at a range of spatial temporal resolutions. let ( ) be the measured rainfall rate with space resolution and time resolution . ( ) if ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) , otherwise ( ) . this definition yields a three dimensional ( ) array of measured rain rate values with spatial averaging regions of size and a sampling interval of . consider the indicator function

(7) can be used to define how the rainfall rate changes with integration volume, where |( )| is the infinite norm. the multi scales rainfall rate fields are defined as ( )

(8) where ( ) is the rainfall rate at position ( ) derived from a spatial integration region of linear size l and temporal integration time t, where is known as the scale parameter. more generally, the spatial and temporal regions could have different scale parameters e.g.: ( )

(9) in particular, the integration can be divided into three categories: spatial integration, temporal integration, and spatial temporal integration. the spatial integration only changes the integration length in the space domain at a fixed time and the temporal integration is at a fixed location. the integration is particularly interesting as the rain event evolves in both space and time, simultaneously. it is therefore a combination of both spatial and temporal integration.

v. experimental results and analysis

generally, rain measurements are carried out at uniform time the annual complementary cumulative distribution function (ccdf) of point, one minute rain intensities can be generated. in this paper, portsmouth (uk) is taken as an example to discuss the results in detail. fig. 2 shows the ccdf of rainfall rate conditioned on the occurrence of rain, for rainfall rate above . it shows that the probability of a spatial temporal volume containing rain gradually increases with the increasing integration time domains respectively, up to around in space and in time. using the technique described in , the ccdf can be transformed to test its log normality. a normal distribution leads to a straight line given by: ( )

(10) where and are the log normal mean and standard deviation respectively, and is the inverse function of ccdf. fig. 3 shows the data and least squares (lsq) linear regression fit to the log normally transformed data, for spatial integration lengths from to ( ) and lengths from to ( ). these results support the hypothesis that rainfall rate distributions can be well approximated by log normal distributions. however, note the systematic deviation for rain rates with ( ) for all spatial integration lengths. this is consistent with the findings in . table 2 and table 3 list all the estimated parameter values ( and ) for portsmouth for different spatial and temporal integration lengths. the value of gradually increases with increasing integration length meanwhile for the value of , the coarser the resolution the smaller it becomes. the consistency of these changes has been tested using spatial grid uk nimrod data.

(b) figure 2: averaged ccdf of five years nimrod rainfall rate data for a range of integration lengths, (a) space domain with time intervals of , and (b) time domain with space resolution of .

fig. 4 gives values of and for different map sizes, , from to , with and . it shows that both and values change significantly for small areas . these values gradually become stable and converge to constant values when the size of the map is greater than . this happens for all spatial and temporal integration lengths (all figures are not presented in this paper). apparently, this indicates that when studying the rain field structure over a large area where there is no strong orographic effect and for which the climate is relatively homogeneous, the statistics of rain is independent of the map size and the integration volume is the factor that needs to be considered.

table 2: experimental coefficients value of log normal distribution parameters for different spatial integration lengths at portsmouth ( )

(b) figure 3: the test for log normality of rainfall rate distribution for different integration lengths, (a) space domain with time intervals of , and (b) time domain with space resolution of .

figure 4: experimental values of parameters of fitted lines for different map sizes centred at portsmouth with and . (a)

(b) figure 5: comparison between observed and fitted results: (a) near equal probability histograms of rainfall rate, (b) rainfall rates exceedance distribution, here and .

the chi squared test was applied to evaluate how well the observed trend can be used to predict rainfall at different space and time resolutions. fig. 5(a) shows the comparison between equal probability bin histograms of rainfall rates observed and fitted ( and ). fig. 5(b) show the predicted results in comparison with the measured data based on the proposed technique. given that rainfall rates above is important for satellite communications, the results in fig. 5(b) shows that the probability of rain is between and . the dotted line is the five year average from measured data whilst the solid line is the best fit of the model. the fitted curve appears plausible up to , after which divergence occurs. however, it should be noted that the probability of exceedance at these higher rainfall rates are based on a small number of samples.

fig. 6 shows the rainfall rate exceeded for in an average year given by rec. itu r p. 837 7 using min temporal integration length of rainfall rate. this is useful for the prediction of rain attenuation in radio communications. the rainfall rate is in the range to in western european. in the portsmouth area the rainfall rate exceeded for of time is approximately , which is larger than the instantaneous rainfall rate exceeded as shown in fig. 5(b). 5

figure 6: rainfall rate ( )exceeded for of the average year given by rec. itu r p. 837 7.

comparing rain model predictions with measured data is commonly used to validate model performance. however the model proposed in this paper does not predict rainfall rate directly but the derived key characteristics of rain. because of this, it is necessary to compute the parameters from measured data and compare them with the proposed model predicted rain characteristic parameters the model's performance. the nimrod database holds two datasets provided by different agencies: one dataset is for northestern europe and the radar stations are located in north europe and are operated by european agencies; and the other is for the british isle and the dataset is provided by the uk met office for radar stations located in the uk. the advantage of the north western europe dataset is its large coverage, but the resolution is in space and in time. this dataset has been used extensively in this research to develop the model. the dataset for the british isle provided by the uk met office only covers the british territory but offers better resolutions ( in space and in time). because the radar stations that generate these two datasets estimate the rain rate at different azimuth scans, times and elevations, the upcaling of uk nimrod data to will be different from the north western europe data for the british isle. however, the key characteristics of rain parameters would be expected to be similar. this has enabled the proposed model to be developed using on set and the other dataset to be used for validation. the uk nimrod data ( sampling in space and in time) has been integrated to form by grids to approximate the eu nimrod data. fig. 7 compares the rainfall rate exceedance distributions at portsmouth (uk) from radar derived eu nimrod data and the uk data (the average over five years). it shows that after the integration, the rainfall rate exceedance distributions generated from the different databases are in strong agreement with the plot from uk nimrod data being slightly lower. the observed rainfall rates exceeded for 0.1%, 0.01% and 0.001% of the time from both eu and uk data at portsmouth are * + and { , }, respectively.

figure 7: comparison of rainfall rate exceedance distribution at portsmouth using eu and uk data averaged over five years.

b. correlation function of rain spatial and temporal correlation functions of rainfall rate are important for rainfall field modeling and simulation , . they vary depending on location, climate, topography, rainfall type, etc. . the impact of space and time averaging on the autocorrelation function is of particular interest . all these factors should be taken into account in the prediction of rain induced attenuation. a) spatial correlation function of rainfall rate the horizontal structure of rainfall fields, hence spatial correlation between important for high frequencies wireless network planning . many empirical models have been proposed and each model is derived from a study of different regions covering different continents, and for rainfall rate measurements with a range of integration volumes. the differences amongst these models indicate that the spatial structure of rainfall fields depends strongly on climate, topography, etc. manabe and kobayashi argued that an exponential distribution is more suitable for european regions and can be adapted to other areas. other exponential models have been proposed in . this study has produced a general empirical equation that fits both the spatial and temporal correlation functions of rain rate. the generalized model is given by: two points, is

(14) where and are parameters to be determined, and can either be (where represents distance in ) or (where is the time lag in ). in this study, five years of rainfall rate data have been analyzed to estimate the spatial and temporal correlation function of rainfall rate. fig. 8 shows the spatial correlation 6

function of rainfall rate at portsmouth for different spatial integration lengths ranging from to . it shows that spatial correlation increases with increasing integration length due to the mixing of point covariance, with the larger covariance dominating. for example, let ( ) , ( ) ( ) be the second moment of the point rainfall rate process. for rain integrated over a line ( )

∫ ( ) , ( ) ( ) , ( ) ( ) ( ) ∫ as long as ( ) is decreasing and convex then ( ) ( ) . the near linear sections of the curves (see fig. 8) suggest exponential correlations. in particular, the data suggests that there are two exponential regions: from to and to . this is less obvious for larger integration length due to the effect of averaging. fig. 9 illustrates the proposed correlation function model (eq. (14)) against values from measured data at in space and in time, resolutions. this shows that the correlation values can accurately be predicted using the proposed model for distances up to . the fitting has been accomplished by the minimization of the error function: where is distance, the second moment is:

figure 8: spatial correlation function of rainfall rate for different spatial integration diameters at portsmouth (here ).

figure 9: example of fitted spatial correlation function of rainfall rate with and . note that the correlation curve falls off rapidly beyond . there is no suitable model for distances above , even the published models. table 4 lists the model parameter values obtained from fitting the proposed model for different spatial integration lengths from to .

table 4: experimental parameter values of spatial correlation functions of rainfall rate for each spatial integration length at portsmouth ( ).

fig. 10 shows the computed spatial correlation function of rainfall rate with different temporal averaging. the eu nimrod data provides near instantaneous rainfall rates at sampling intervals. averaging n consecutive rainfall rate values for the same diameter region yields a coarse estimate of the ( ) temporal integration. it shows that temporal correlation also increases with increasing temporal integration length, similar to spatial correlation. the fitted parameter values for integration lengths from to are given in table 5.

figure 11: comparison of spatial correlation functions of rain, for five european locations, derived from five years of radar data (here and ). 7

five locations distributed across the western european radar scanned area were investigated to assess how spatial and temporal correlation functions of rainfall rate changes with location. fig. 11 presents their spatial correlation functions calculated using five years of data. the spatial correlation is very close for all locations for the scales ( ), which is a typical scale for rain storms. for larger scales, the spatial correlation is more variable and differs appreciably. this is consistent with the findings of manabe who studied locations in europe. the large difference in correlation values between paris and rennes suggests a strong climatological or the topographic dependency. distributions are close to exponential over the range to . the range beyond yields negative correlation values. this could be used to optimize diversity gain when choosing locations for satellite ground stations. for all locations studied, the proposed correlation model (eq. (14)) provides a very good fit to the calculated values. this supports results reported in . in addition, the authors have relied upon the nimrod system to produce unbiased results. although the resolution of the data will be higher nearer radars, this should not affect the correlation. the rain fields have been assumed to be isotropic and hence the correlations to be rotationally symmetric. it seems more reasonable to assume that maritime and continental locations will experience a different mix of weather systems and so exhibit different correlation functions. b) temporal correlation function of rain rate

is important for network reliability design, sufficient link power margin provision as well as adequate fade mitigation employment. fig. 12 compares the temporal correlation functions of rainfall rate of the five european locations based on five years data. at a correlation value of (equal to the value of ), correlation times of between and are obtained at different locations indicating a strong location dependency. fig. 12 also shows that the rate changes function of temporal correlation significantly with lengths between and . similar results have been reported in for sampling periods of and using data measured using a disdrometer. temporal correlation function of rainfall rate

figure 12: temporal correlation function of rainfall rate for five european locations, here and . the data and the fitted curves based on eq. (14) for different temporal integration lengths are provided in fig. 13. the fitted curves are in good agreement with the measured data for time lags up to . the values of the parameters of eq. (14) for each temporal integration length are provided in table 6.

fig. 14 shows the short lag temporal correlation function at portsmouth for different spatial integration lengths ranging from up to with . it shows that the temporal correlation function gradually becomes smoother due to spatial averaging with increasing integration length.

figure 13: fitted lines for the temporal correlation function of rainfall rate with different temporal integration lengths at portsmouth, here .

table 6: experimental parameter values of temporal correlation function of rainfall rate for different temporal integration lengths at portsmouth ( ).

the differences between the temporal correlation between and indicate a strong integration length dependency. however, the temporal correlation falls off quickly for any spatial integration length with short time lags to below (roughly ) at approximately . the fitted parameter values of the proposed mathematical model are given in table 7.

figure 14: temporal correlation function of rainfall rate for different spatial integration lengths at portsmouth, here . 8

typically, the temporal correlation function of point rainfall rate is affected by advection. the variation of rainfall rate at a point is due to two processes; the evolution of the rain event and the movement of the rain event. rain event evolution tends to be slow but dominates at time lags of minutes or longer whilst the movement of rain event over a point dominates for short time lags. this variation is modeled as the movement (advection) of a fixed pattern of rain over a point using the frozen storm hypothesis . it states that the statistics of rain at a point are the same as the statistics of rain along a line parallel with advection. the interpretation of this is: ( ) ( ( ) ), where is the advection vector, and are an arbitrary position and time. this means that for time lags less than 40 minutes, the temporal covariance of point rainfall rate for a lag ( ) is the same as the spatial covariance for a spatial lag of | | , assuming that the rain field is homogeneous and isotropic. the temporal correlation presented the actual correlation experienced at a point. at short time lags it averages over the range of advection speeds experienced. for lags greater than about minutes, the results are determined by a combination of the evolution of large rain events and the clustering of rain events. c) validation comparing rain model predictions with measured data is commonly used to validate model performance. the predictions of the model proposed in this paper, however, are not rainfall rates but the derived key characteristics of rain. because of this it is necessary to compute the parameters from measured data and compare them with model predicted rain characteristics the model's performance. one year of uk nimrod data ( ) has been used to

figure 15: comparison of spatial correlation function of rainfall rate at portsmouth achieved from different databases ( 𝐿 𝑘𝑚 and 𝑇 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑠). validate the model performance. the data has been up scaled to achieve the same integration length as eu data with spatial resolution and time resolution. fig. 15 presents the spatial correlation function of rainfall rate at portsmouth estimated from both eu nimrod database and uk nimrod database. it compares uk and eu data of 2008 and a combined five years ( to ) of eu nimrod data. the up scaled uk grid data from yields very similar results as the eu data for the same period. this provides assurances of the validity of the approach adopted. the curve derived from combining years of eu data is significantly different showing that there could have been significant year to year rainfall rate variations. the two nearxponential ranges, from to and between and are present in all curves. this suggests that the same processes are present but in different proportions. this finding is in accordance with the results presented in fig. 8 fig. 11. fig. 16 compares temporal correlation functions of rainfall rate at portsmouth using data from eu nimrod database and uk nimrod database for 2008. although there is a small difference, the results show that the proposed approach gives good estimates of data at one location.

figure 16: comparison of temporal correlation function of rainfall rate at portsmouth achieved from both eu nimrod database and uk nimrod database, for and .

c. probability of rain occurrence the probability of rain occurrence has been studied using five years of radar data. each location has its own value and the value for any size of map can be obtained by averaging the values of all points within that map. it should be noted that the value of is poorly defined, as it is very difficult to tell whether rain is light or it is not raining at all. its value is influenced by the way rainfall rate is measured as many instruments become unreliable at low rainfall rates. for radars, light rain could either be masked, or falsely generated, by noise within the radar equipment. in many studies, the value of is determined less by the measurements of very light rain but by the optimized fit of a rainfall rate distribution model to the full range of rainfall rates . an example that reveals how the probability of rain occurrence changes with varying map sizes, , is presented in fig. 17. if a sufficiently long time interval is studied, the spatial variation in will exist due to orographic effects and microclimates. in this study it is assumed that the years of data is sufficiently long to estimate the long term first order 9

table 8: probability of rain at five locations with different spatial resolutions ranging from 𝑘𝑚 to 𝑘𝑚, here 𝑇 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑠. 10

table 10: equation 17 fitted parameters for a range of spatial and temporal integration lengths.

the variation of with increasing integration length, both in space and time, together with the fitted curves are shown in fig. 18. is calculated using the same approach described in section iv after integration. it shows that the value of also increases with an increase in the integration length (the same information can be found in table 8 and table 9). it is evident (and logical) that values will drop close to when integration length approaches or increase up to when the integration length is long enough. interestingly, kundu and siddani in found the exactly the same empirical equations for the probability of rain occurrence based on raingauge data. the model parameter values of eq. (17), for each location, are presented in table 10. the results show that the proposed expression gives good estimates throughout the whole range of integration lengths, especially in the time domain, see fig. 18(b). this is because there are a large number of samples (five years in total) for studying in the time domain but smaller number of samples in the space domain as only one location is focused on during each processing time.

this paper has presented the outcome of an extensive study of five years (2005 to 2009) of rain radar data spanning in north western europe. four key oceanic climate characteristics of rainfall rate have been studied for a range of spatial and temporal integration lengths: (i) the annual statistical distribution, (ii) the annual spatial correlation function, (iii) the temporal correlation function, and (iv) the point probability of rain/no rain. it has been found that all the key characteristics of rain are strongly dependent on the spatial integration length ( ) and temporal integration length ( ) . the results show that integration length has a significant impact on all key rain parameters owing to the high variability that rainfall intensity exhibits. this paper proposes a new model that can be used to estimate the spatial and temporal correlation of rainfall rate at different integration lengths for any location in north western europe. the method is capable of producing estimates at spatial integration lengths from to and temporal lengths from to . this is critical for future simulation studies and will be highly applicable to satellite network research and planning. the probability of rain occurrence has been shown to exhibit spatial variation over distances as short as . so far no physical equation has been found that can combine the three factors ( , and ) to provide good estimates of . an empirical model has been proposed in this paper that can accurately estimate the value for a wide range of integration from to and between and (one day). the proposed model is valid when one of the spatial or temporal integration length is fixed, for a fixed map size. in short, at least two factors should be constant when utilizing the proposed model to estimate values, and the combination is either * + or * +. lengths;

finally, the results presented in this paper show that rain field structure is not constant over large areas but vary from one to another. this has also been partially demonstrated by other researchers such as in . the statistical model proposed in this paper yields more accurate results as rain characteristics have been studied at multiple locations for a wide range of integration volumes. in particular, the proposed model significantly reduces the complexities and improves the accuracy of estimating rain characteristics and hence, radio wave attenuation, for wide area high frequency communication network planning in north western europe. this is because network planners and designers of physical layer fade mitigation techniques require knowledge of rain characteristics at smaller space and time scales than are typically available from radar or rain gauge measurements. also, the prediction of quality of service (qos) and the design of rain attenuation mitigation techniques rely on knowledge of short integration time of rain attenuation time series. this paper has proposed a statistical model that can be used to estimate rain characteristics at finer scales that are required by rain field simulators in order to generate useful information such as rain rate estimates for rain induced attenuation statistics computation. location

however, the proposed equations for modeling the rainfield characteristics are only valid for cases where either the spatial integration length or the temporal integration length is constant, whilst the other is changing. therefore our future work will focus on characterizing the rainfall fields in space and time domains simultaneously.

the authors thank the british atmospheric data centre (badc), which is part of the nerc national centre for atmospheric science (ncas), and the british met office for providing access to the nimrod rain radar data sets. partial support from ict cost action integrated ic0802, telecommunication, navigation and earth observation systems" is gratefully acknowledged. "propagation tools and data for

r. k. crane, "electromagnetic wave propagation through rain", wiley

a. d. panagopoulos and j. d. kanellopoulos, "on the rain attenuation dynamics: spatial‐temporal analysis of rainfall rate and fade duration statistics", international journal of satellite communications and networking, 21(6), 2003, pp.595 611. 11