verification of authentication protocols for mobile satellite communication systems

in recent times, many protocols have been proposed to provide security for mobile satelbstract lite communication systems. such protocols must be tested for their functional correctness before they are used in practice. many security protocols for the mobile satellite communication system have been presented. this paper analyzes three of the most famous authentication protocols for mobile satellite communication system from the security viewpoint of data desynchronization attack. based on strand spaces testing model, data desynchronization attacks on these protocols were tested and analyzed. furthermore, improvements to overcome the security vulnerabilities of two protocols are mentioned. (cid:2) 2014 production and hosting by elsevier b.v. on behalf of national authority for remote sensing and space sciences.

nowadays, mobile satellite communication systems have become one of the most important technologies. security is a very important requirement in any system, especially in wireess communication systems. for a satellite user to communiate with other users, he must be authenticated first by the remote server. this paper is concerned with the authentication between mobile users and the remote server. many mobile satellite communication systems have been proposed in recent years (chang and chang, 2005; chen et al., 2009; lasc et al., 2011; eun jun et al., 2011; lee et al., 2012; cruickshank, 1996;

e mail addresses: rehlatif@yahoo.co, rehlatif@gmail.com peer review under responsibility of national authority for remote sensing and space sciences.

hwang et al., 2003). in the past, for more than 10 years the traitional satellite communication system that was used was the geostationary satellite. the geostationary satellite is located in geosynchronous equatorial orbit (geo). such a satellite returns to the same position in the sky after each sidereal day (larson and wertz, 1999). however, the quite far distance, exactly 22,300 miles, between the geostationary satellite and the earth resulted in a signal delay problem. over the past 10 years, communication (leo) systems are used for establishing personal communication sysems as shown in fig. 1. this is due to their large broadcasting range and communication area, small attenuation of the sigals and a shorter transmission delay (chen et al., 2009). there have been many researches on the authentication protocols for the mobile satellite communication system. some protocols are based on public key cryptosystems like cruickshank (1996) which involves heavy computation costs. in 2003, hwang et al. (2003) proposed an authentication protocol using symetric encryption to reduce the complexity of computations. but both cruichshank's protocol and hwang et al.'s protocol low earth orbit satellite were not good for forward secrecy and efficiency. in 2005, chang and chang (2005) proposed a new protocol to solve the weakness found in previous protocols. they used the dife hellman key exchange (diffie and hellman, 1976). but from our analysis in section 3 we found that change et al.'s protocol (chang and chang, 2005) is susceptible to data desynchronization attack. in 2009, chen et al. (2009) proposed a protocol based on discrete logarithm problem. it overcomes the complexity of public key infrastructure, reduces the hard computation from the mobile user and does not require sensiive verification table for the ncc. but this protocol is suscepible to data desynchronization attack as will be declared in section 4.

in 2012, lee et al. (2012) pointed out that change et al.'s protocol (chang and chang, 2005) lacked user anonymity and impersonation attack. lee et al. proposed a new protocol that has low computation cost. he claimed that his protocol avoids previous security flaws. but this protocol is also suscepible to data desynchronization attack as will be declared in section 5.

in our paper we presented an analysis for the three most famous authentication protocols for mobile satellite communiation systems (chang and chang, 2005; chen et al., 2009; lee et al., 2012). we are concerned with the data desynchronizaion attack in our analysis for these protocols. we chose this type of attack for our analysis because this attack depends on jamming which is considered the most dangerous enemy in space communication. the notations in table 1 are used throughout this paper.

a strand is a sequence of actions executed by a single principal in a single local session of a protocol (guttman, 2011). we enrich strands to allow them to synchronize with the projection of the joint state that is local to the principal p executing the strand. the actions on a strand are defined into: message transissions, message receptions, and state synchronization events. strands are used for the protocol and communication behavior (guttman, 2011). a strand is a (linearly ordered) sequence of nodes n1 ) . . . ) nj, each of which represents either:

transmission of some message msg(ni) = ti, graphically ti ; (cid:2) ! reception of some message msg(ni) = ti, graphically !

a strand is a sequence of transmission and reception events local to a particular run of a principal. if this principal is honest, it is a regular strand. if it is dishonest, it is a penetrator strand (guttman and javier thayer fabrega, 2001). a bundle c is a causally well founded collection of nodes and arrows of both kinds. in a bundle, when a strand receives a message m, there is a unique node transmitting m from which the message was immediately received. by contrast, when a strand transmits a message m, many strands (or none) may immediately receive m. the height of a strand in a bundle is the number of nodes on the strand that are in the bundle (guttman and javier thayer fabrega, 2001). in the following sections an analysis of the most three famous schemes for mobile satellite authentiation protocols is presented. suggestions are presented to improve these schemes. we assume in the three presented proocols that the leo satellite is always a trust node. during the paper, transmission of messages from the ncc to the user u means transmission from the ncc to the leo, then transission from the leo to u. also the opposite is correct. transission of messages from the user u to the ncc means transmission from u to the leo, then transmission from the leo to the ncc. ti (cid:2);

3.1. the cc protocol

chang and chang proposed a mutual authentication mechaism (chang and chang, 2005) hereafter referred to as the cc protocol. in the cc protocol, the authentication between the mobile user and the network control center (ncc) is within a leo satellite communication system. mobile users are interconnected directly through leo satellite links, while communication between satellites and the ncc is managed by gateways. the cc protocol is composed of three phases: registration, authentication and mobile update.

3.1.1. the registration phase

in this phase, u has to register at the system. u is assigned a permanent identity uid, the secret key k shared between u and ncc, a temporary identity tidu by the gateway, and the number of times (n) that the mobile user can access the service before an update phase is required.

3.1.2. the authentication phase

the authentication phase is performed by u and ncc before any communication. note that ncc stores (uid, tidu, leoid, hn+1 (j(cid:3)1)(k||uid||tidu), (n(cid:3)(j (cid:3) 1))) for u, and u keeps (uid, tidu, k, (n(cid:3)(j (cid:3) 1))) at this stage. the details are described as follows:

step 1: the leo sends the authentication request to u. step 2: after getting the authentication request, u computes h(p) ¯ r and p ¯ h(r), where p = hn(cid:3)(j(cid:3)1) (k||uid||tidu) and r is a one time random number. then u sends the computation results and tidu to leo. step 3: upon getting h(p) ¯ r, p ¯ h(r), tidu, and leoid, ncc. step 4: after getting h(p) ¯ r, p ¯ h(r), tidu, and leoid, ncc uses tidu to obtain the corresponding secret data using the lookup table. the authentication process between the ncc and u in this protocol is based on proving the authentication possession of token p. the ncc computes r0 = hn+1(cid:3)(j(cid:3)1)(k||uid|| tidu) ¯ (h(p) ¯ r), p0 = h(r0) ¯ (p ¯ h(r)), h(p0). if h(p0) = hn+1(cid:3)(j(cid:3)1)(k||uid||tidu), ncc first updates uid, tidu, leoid, hn+1(cid:3)(j(cid:3)1)(k||uid||tidu), (n (cid:3) j + 1) to (uid, tidu, leoid, p0, (n (cid:3) j)) and computes h(r0||p0). then ncc sends h(r0||p0), leoid, tidu and the grant message to leo. otherwise, ncc terminates the protocol. step 5: after receiving the messages sent from ncc, leo forwards them to u. step 6: upon getting h(r0||p0) and tidu forwarded by leo, u checks whether h(r||p) is equal to h(r0||p0). if it holds, u is convinced that ncc is legal and updates uid, tidu, k, (n(cid:3)(j (cid:3) 1))) to uid, tidu, k, (n (cid:3) j)).

in the nth authentication, u and ncc enter the mobile update phase. the ncc generates and issues a new session key k and a new temporary identity tidu for the user to be used for the next n authentications. in the authentication phase of the cc protocol, ncc and u update their shared secret information shown in fig. 2 as folows: the ncc updates its shared secret before sending mesage 2. u updates its shared secret after receiving message 2. if message 2 of the authentication phase of the protocol does not reach the mobile user u because of the penetrator pn for example while the ncc has already updated the secret shared data and u has not updated yet the ncc and u will operate at different levels in the hash chain. thus, they operate asynchroously on the hash value that is used to authenticate each other.

3.3. improvement of the cc protocol

for the above flaw, the following improvements to the cc protocol to resist data desynchronization attacks are presented in lasc et al. (2011). the mobile authentication phase is

figure 2 data desynchronization attack on cc protocol. changed into two modes. the selection between the two modes is according to whether there are legitimate authentication illegitimate authentication requests requests (1, 2b) as shown in fig. 3. after the mobile sends mesage 1 as in fig. 3 the ncc computes r0, p0, and h(p0). the ncc then checks if h(p0) = hn+1(cid:3)(j(cid:3)1)(k|uid|tidu). if the check holds the ncc updates the corresponding entry in the lookup table to (uid, tidu, leoid, p0, (n (cid:3) j)). in message 2a ncc sends tidu, h(r0||p0) to u by the leo. u verifies the authenticity of ncc as before then if the ncc is authentic u updates the stored data. on the other hand, if the ncc receives an incorrect authentication request, it responds with a resynchronization challenge (messages 1, 2b). the message 2b contains h(pncc||tidu), h(pncc) ¯ rncc; where pncc is ncc's currently stored authentication token, rncc is a newly generated random number. once receiving message 2b, the mobile user compares the received pncc with the remaining p values in the chain. if a match is found the mobile user advances to the resynchronization phase. if no match is found the resynchronization request is considered illegitimate and the same authentication request is re sent.

chen et al. proposed an authentication mechanism for mobile satellite communication systems in chen et al. (2009). the clc protocol is as follows:

the ncc chooses a large prime l and a generator g of the * with order q (q is a large prime factor multiplicative group zl of l (cid:3) 1). the ncc selects a long term private key x, 1 6 x < q; and the corresponding public key is y = gx mod l.

the ncc assigns to each mobile user u a permanent identity uid, an initial temporary identity tid, and selects a random number k; 1 6 k < q, and computes:

table. the ncc stores uid, tidu, ks in user's smart card. during this phase, the two parties u and ncc use the shared secrets established during the initialization and registration phases to prove their identity to each other.

u calculates the session key sk = h(ks, tidu); tidu is refreshed after one successful login, and calculates c = mac ks (uid, tidu, sk).

leo fi ncc:tidu, c, leoid; the leo appends its identity

leoid upon receiving the authentication message.

ncc ! leo : ðtidu; tidunewþsk; leoid:

the ncc checks the identity of the leo upon receiving the

authentication message and does the following operations:

a) find the corresponding information {uid, r, s} associted with tid by looking up the verification table. b) validates k using the equation s = h(uid)x + kr(cid:3)1

c) computes the possible user secret key ks 0 = h(uid, k),

and the possible session key sk0 = h(ku, tidu).

then check if c0 = c. if they match the user is authenticated and the session key is confirmed otherwise the authentication request is rejected. c0 ¼ mack0

e) generate tidnew and update the verification table, then

return {(tidu, tidunew)sk, leoid} to the leo.

leo ! u : ðtidu; tidunewþsk

once the user receives the data, he can verify whether the decrypted tidu is identical to the stored tidu. if they are idenical, the mobile user u will authenticate the ncc and will temporary identity to tidunew for update its the next authentication request. after authentication, the two parties will encrypt their data with the session key sk. tidunew will be used for the next authentication request.

in (chen et al., 2009), chen et al. deemed that their proposed authentication protocol could guarantee data confidentiality, mutual authentication, and user's privacy. however, the clc protocol cannot offer any protection against data synhronization attack: a penetrator pn can easily force an honest tag to fall out of synchronization with the reader so that it can no longer authenticate itself successfully. the data desynchroization attack on the clc protocol can be described in fig. 4. in the data desynchronization attack, the penetrator pn easily destroys the synchronization of tidu between the ncc and the mobile user u. pn can intercept the message (tidu, tidunew)sk from ncc to u. therefore, ncc will refresh the user tempoary identity tidu while the user u will not do it. thus, the shared temporary identity between u and ncc is not idential. after a successful data desynchronization attack, u and ncc will share different secrets and u and ncc will not authorize each other mutually. thus, the availability of the clc protocol is destroyed. to solve the data desynchronization attack problem described above, the ncc must keep the old temporary identity tidu from the last successful authentication. when u and ncc fail to authenticate because of data desynchronization attack, it will use the previous stored temporary identity tidu as shown in fig. 5:

two extra messages must be added to solve the problem of data desynchronization attack for the clc protocol. when the user u does not receive any messages from the ncc because of jamming, he will resend message no. 2 with a new c, which is called c0 as shown in step 4 in fig. 5. the ncc must compare the received tidu with the new one and the previous one. if the received tidu is equal to the last stored one, the ncc will send message no. 3 again with the last generated tidnew to save time and computation overhead.

5. data desynchronization attack on the lee et al. protocol

lee et al. proposed an authentication scheme for satellite communication systems (lee et al., 2012). their scheme consists of three phases: registration phase, login phase, and authentication phase.

where k is a secret random number and x is a long term private key generated by the ncc. then, the ncc creates the tempoary identity tidu and stores uid and tidu in the verification table. after that, the ncc issues a smart card and sends it to u. the smart card contents are: {tidu, r, k, h()}.

step l1. u inserts his smart card into a smart card reader 3.

figure 5 improvement of clc protocol.

then the smart card chooses a secret random number r to

step l2. u fi ncc:q, s, tid finally, u sends the login message {q, s, tid} to the ncc.

step a1. after receiving the authentication request from u, the ncc obtains uid according to tid and computes

a) the ncc checks if s0 = s. if they match the user is authenticated. otherwise, the authentication request is rejected.

step a2. once the mobile user is authenticated, the ncc

chooses a secret random t to compute

then, the ncc generates the new temporary identity tidnew to calculate v4 = v3 ¯ tidnew and replaces tid with tidnew in the verification table. the ncc computes v2 = h(p||r0||t||v4) .

step a3. ncc fi u:v1, v2, v4 after receiving these messages, u computes

2 is the same as v2. if they are, then u

authenticates the ncc successfully. then u computes

u replaces tid with tidnew in the user's smart card and

computes the session key sk.

sk ¼ hðuidjjrjjt0jjp0þ from fig. 6, it is evident that the lee et al. protocol cannot resist the data desynchronization attack. the penetrator pn can intercept the message v1, v2, v4 from the ncc to the leo. therefore the ncc has refreshed the temporary identity tidnew before u received the updated message.

the ncc must store the old tid. if the replying message from the ncc is lost. u will re login and the ncc uses the old tid of u. the desynchronization problem of the lee protocol is solved by extending ncc's storage time for tid until u enters the next authentication phase using the expected value tidnew which proves that u has successfully updated its secrets. storng the value tid used in the previous authentication session allows ncc to get the correct uid when u makes re login. so fig. 6 should be modified into fig. 7.

as shown in fig. 7, two extra steps are added. after the user u fails to receive v1, v2, v4 due to the effect of the pentrator, he must re login with a new q and s as shown in step 5 (fig. 7).

the three presented protocols satisfy mutual authentication. but in the case of jamming or data desynchronization attack the mutual authentication will not be achieved. the improveents to the three presented protocols make the mutual authentication return after finishing of the jamming. so the connection between the user u and the ncc will not be lost forever. two extra messages are needed for the presented three protocols and storing of the previous authentication token is required in the case of the cc's protocol. in the case of the clc's and lee et al.'s protocols, storing of the previous user's identity is required. pn

our paper makes a security analysis to authentication protools for mobile satellite communication systems. the paper concentrates on special type of attack. it is a data desynchroization attack. as a future work we can investigate further attacks and try to give other suitable solutions to these other types of attacks. in our paper, we used strand spaces verificaion tool, which is considered the most suitable verification method for data desynchronization attack. we can test the other attacks using other formal analysis methods which are more suitable to other types of attacks.

this paper discusses data desynchronization attacks on some authentication protocol for mobile satellite communication proposed in chang and chang (2005), chen et al. (2009), and lee et al. (2012). in the strand spaces model, we found that the three presented protocols were vulnerable to data desynchronization attacks. in addition, improvements to overome the vulnerabilities of two protocols were given.

chang, y.f., chang, c.c., 2005. an efficient authentication protocol for mobile satellite communication systems. acm sigops oper. syst. rev. 39 (1), 70 84.

cruickshank, h.s., 1996. a security system for satellite networks. ieee satellite system mobile communication navigation, uk, 187 190.