vulnerabilities, threats, and authentication in satellite based navigation systems

applications. high level of accuracy is essential for the above operations, implying a necessity to ensure that the gnss data are immune from inerfering sources. interference mitiation and anti jam techniques must proceed under the challenging condiions of weak satellite navigation sigals with highly negative decibel signal to noise and interference ratio, and under possible structural similarty of the desired and undesired sigo nals. there are several ways deliberately compromise positioning, velocity, and timing accuracies. for example, spoofers that mimic gnss signals can mislead the receivers into false positioning, timing, and wrong velocity. the challenge to maintain accurate gnss signals is compounded by the explosion in the number of wireless devices causing nondeliberate interference. incorrect

the proliferation of unintentional and intentional interference to gnss signals has led to a heightened interst in devising effective anti jamming emphasis experimental results on a prototype software defined receiver. the third paper "small and adaptive antennas and arrays for gnss applications" by volakis et al. reviews design asects of antenna arrays for gnss. the focus is on miniaturized and lightweight adaptive arrays with inapabilities. rejection terference such miniaturization is crucial to enable gnss in markets where size and weight are key constraints. the paper includes several gnss antenna array examples of large bandwidth.

the second group of articles disusses jamming types and spoofing impact at different attacks, stages of a gnss receiver, and poential "impact countermeasures. and detection of gnss jammers on consumer grade satellite navigation receivers" by borio et al. describes different types of gnss jammers and reviews their impact on commercial receivers. a survey of state of the art methods for jamming detection is also provided. different detection approaches are investigated which can be implemented at different reeiver processing stages. it is shown that jamming can practically impact all receiver stages, from the front end to the navigation solution. specific emphasis is given to intermediate power jamming attacks when jaming signals are sufficiently powerful to significantly degrade receiver pernterrupting reormance without ceiver article "overview of spatial processing aproaches for gnss structural interfernce detection and mitigation" by broumandan et al. provides an overiew of research work on gnss signal authentication utilizing spatial processing methods, categoized into three different groups. the first group considers the antenna aray jammer and spoofing mitigation methods, being the most effective countermeasure against interference signals. the second group considers antenna motion to detect spoofing atacks. in this case, the spatial samles are taken over an observation window that can be implemented at their

recent waveform estimation and mitigation. the paper "interference localization for satellite navigation systems" by dempster and cetin provides a surey and analysis of interference localzation include strength, angle of received signal arrival, time difference of arrival, and frequency difference of arrival approaches. the performance of these techniques is considered when aplied individually and in combinaion, both using fixed and mobile platforms. the paper features real systems and architectures of intererence geolocalization. techniques that

the capabilities of gnss can be augmented when used in combinaion to other sensors. the last group of articles in this issue is precisely dealing with such hybridization and complementarity with external senors. particularly, in "protecting gnss receivers from jamming and interference" by gao et al., the auhors provide an overview of various approaches for protecting gnss reeivers against interference. namely, external inertial systems, spatial filtering via antenna array beamforming, condiioning and filtering in the timerequency vector tracking instead of traditional scalar tracking are discussed. using inertial aiding and vector tracking, the minium required signal to noise ratio is lowered for reliable signal acquisiion and tracking. the authors also discuss timerequency filtering approaches can be used to suppress interfering sigals before feeding the receiver. these approaches can be combined for more robust anti jamming proection of a gnss receiver. the last paper is "multisensor navigation systems: a remedy for gnss vulnerailities?" by grejner brzezinska et al. this paper offers a review of the that have advances technological taken place in space based pnt over the last two decades. these advances are already available in handheld their hybridization pdas, making realizing multisensory viable aiding using

how spatial and he joined villanova university, villanova, pa, usa, in 1985, where he is now the director of the center for advanced communications. he has over 700 journal and conference publications in signal processing theory and applications. he couthored 20 book chapters and is the editor of the three books through the wall radar imaging, compressive sensing for urban radar, and radar for indoor monitoring (boca raton, fl, usa: crc press, 2011, 2014, and 2017, respectively).

dr. amin is a fellow of the international society of optical engineerng, the institute of engineering and technology, and the european asociation for signal processing. he is a recipient of the 2016 alexander von humboldt research award, the 2014 ieee signal processing socihe 2009 individual technical ety technical achievement award, achievement award from the european association for signal processng, the ieee warren d white award for excellence in radar engineerng, the 2010 nato scientific achievement award, the 2010 chief of naval research challenge award, the villanova university outstanding faculty research award in 1997, and the ieee philadelphia section award in 1997. he was a distinuished lecturer of the ieee signal processing society (2003 2004), and is currently the chair of the electrical cluster of the franklin instiute committee on science and the arts.

in 2003, he joined the department of signal theory and communications, upc, as a research assistant and during 2008 he was a research visitor at the stony brook university (sbu), stony brook, ny, usa. in september 2009, he joined the centre tecnològic we wish to thank all the conributors for their outstanding pand in pers which, combination, addressed the status of gnss research and technology. the are herein acknowledged for their inightful reviews that increased the quality of issue. finally, we are gratefully to vaishali damle, the managing editor and jo sun, the senior publication editor of the proceedings of the ieee, who strongly supported the development of this issue. h individually

de telecomunicacions de catalunya (cttc), barcelona, spain, where he currently holds a position as a senior researcher and head of the staistical inference for communications and positioning department. he has many years of experience in projects funded by the european comission, spanish and catalan governments, as well as the european space agency in both technical and managerial duties. his primary areas of interest include statistical and array signal processing, estimaion and detection theory, bayesian filtering, robustness analysis, and game theory, with applications to positioning systems, wireless comunications, and mathematical biology.

dr. closas is a senior member of ion and eurasip. he was ineee imws'11, volved in the organizing committees of eusipco'11, ieee rfid ta'11, european wireless'14, ieee ssp'16, and ieee icassp'20 conferences. he is the recipient of the eurasip best phd thesis award 2014 and the 9th duran farell award for technology research, both in recognition to his contributions to the field of sigal processing for gnss.

ali broumandan (member, ieee) received the b.sc. and m.sc. degrees from the electrical enineering department and the ph.d. degree from the geomatics engineering department.

from 2009 to 2012, has was a senior reearch associate in position, location and naviation (plan) group of the university of calgary, calgary, ab, canada, where his research focused on signal processing aspects of gnss receiver. from may 2012 to october 2013, he was involved in gnss industry as a senior gnss specialist where his work focused on different signal processing aspects of high precision gnss receivers. since november 2013, he has been with the plan group, university of calgary, as a senior research associate, where his research focuses on gnss interference mitigation utilizing antenna array processing. he has been involved in several industrial research projects focusing on spatial/temporal characterization of gnss channels in dense multipath environments and synthetic antenna array processing.